Udho Dass vs State Of Haryana & Ors on 21 April, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
7
, Cited by 
123
]










Top AI Tags


preliminary-notification-on-land


refer-court-for-land


land-acquisition-law


declaring-land-required-for-public-purpose,notification-to-public






User Queries


land potentiality


abut


beltings


125


highway


first appeals


Haryana  filter:  land acquisition cases










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Udho Dass vs State Of Haryana & Ors on 21 April, 2010


Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2010 SC 80, 2010 (12) SCC 51, (2010) 9 SCALE 41, (2010) 82 ALL LR 768, (2010) 94 ALL IND CAS 58 (SC)


Bench: 
Harjit Singh Bedi
, 
J.M. Panchal


                                         UDHO DASS
                                    v.
                      STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.
                     (Civil Appeal No. 3677 of 2010)
                               APRIL 21, 2010
                [Harjit Singh Bedi and J.M. Panchal, JJ.]
                            2010 (8) SCR 900

    The Order of the Court was delivered

                                     ORDER



    1. Permission to file SLPs is granted.



    2. Delay condoned in filing substitution applications.



    3. Applications for substitution are allowed.



    4. Delay condoned in filing the special leave petitions.



    5. Leave granted.



    6. Vide Notification dated 17th May, 1990 under 
Section 4
 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, (hereinafter called `
The Act
') 162.5 acres of land
situated in village Patti Musalmanan was notified for setting up of a housing
project in Sector 12, Sonepat. This Notification was followed by a declaration
under 
Section 6
 of the Act on 16th May 1991. The Collector rendered his
Award on 12th May 1993 awarding a sum of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees two
lakhs) per acre as compensation for the entire land.



    7. On a reference under 
Sec. 18
 of the Act to the Additional District
Judge, Sonepat, the compensation was enhanced to Rs.125/- per sq. yard for
the land behind the E.C.E. factory situated away and on the left side of the
Sonepat Bahalgarh road and Rs.150/- per square yard on the right side
abutting the aforesaid road. In arriving at these different figures the Reference
Court held that the land on the left side did not abut the road and it had
therefore less potential value vis-a-vis. the land on the right side which
touched the road.

    8. The High Court in first appeal further enhanced the compensation from
Rs.125/- to Rs.135/- for land on the left side and to Rs.160/- from Rs.150/- on
the right side on the principle applied by the Reference Court. The present set
of appeals at the instance of the landowners have been filed impugning the
judgments of the courts below.



    9. We have gone through the record and have heard the learned counsel
for the parties at length.



 
10. It has been submitted by Mr. A.K. Srivastava, the learned senior
counsel in most of the appeals, that the appellants were entitled to take the
Award for the acquisition in village Jamalpur Kalan which pertained to an
acquisition of the year 1992, and which had led to a compensation of
Rs.250/- per square yard, as the basis for the determination of the
compensation in the present case as well as the land of Jamalpur Kalan had
a common boundary with the land acquired behind the E.C.E. factory with a
small deduction in the price as the present acquisition was of the year 1990.
In the alternative he has submitted that the compensation ought to have been
settled on the basis of the sale instances exhibits P.2 to P.14 which showed a
substantial increase yearwise from Rs.300/- per sq. yd in 1984 (Ext. P.2) to
Rs. 600/- in 1989 (Ext. P.14). He has also submitted that as the land had
been notified for the purpose of a housing project no distinction could be
made between the land abutting the main road and that which was slightly
away and the belting principle applied by the District Judge as well as the
High Court was not called for. For this argument the learned counsel has
placed reliance on 
P. Rama Reddi and Others vs. Land Acquisition Officer,
Hyderabad Urban Development Authority, Hyderabad and others
 (1995) 2
SCC 305. It has also been submitted that though the potentiality of the land
had admittedly been noted by the District Judge and the High Court but the
full potential of land had not been appreciated or recognized and as such it
was open to this Court to reappraise the evidence and to arrive at a fair
assessment on this aspect, as the compensation proceedings started in the
year 1990, were still continuing.




    11. Mr. P.S. Patwalia, the learned senior counsel for some of the other
claimants has supplemented the arguments made by Mr. Srivastava and has
also placed reliance on the award in the case of village Jamalpur Kalan.
Some of the other counsel have also raised certain issues but as they are
substantially covered by the submissions noted above we need not refer to
them.



    12. Mr. Shakil Ahmed, the learned counsel appearing in SLP(C) No.
18312/2008 has further pointed out that the proper compensation for the
building and trees had not been correctly awarded and the compensation
under these heads needed to be substantially enhanced.



 
13. The arguments raised by the learned counsel for the claimants have
been controverted by Mr. Govind Goel, the learned counsel appearing for the
beneficiary-respondents. He has submitted that the Award in the case of
Jamalpur Kalan could not be taken into account for the primary reason that it
pertained to an acquisition of 1992 whereas the present one was of 1990 and
the District Judge as well as the High Court had fully recognized the potential
of the land and had accorded compensation on that basis. He has also
submitted that the reliance by the claimants on the sale instances Ext. P.2 to
P.14 was misplaced as they pertained to very small areas of one Biswa (50
sq. yd) and the other sale instances put on record by the claimants
themselves (Ext.p.15 and P.16) pertaining to two sales made on 28th April,
1989 for 4400 square yards at Rs.120/- per square yard and P.16 for 1600
square yards at Rs.122/- per square yard had in fact been accepted by the
Courts below with a marginal increase towards the potential of the acquired
land. It has also been submitted that in the light of the fact that these were
sale instances pertaining to this very village that is Patti Musalmanan there
was absolutely no justification in going to the Award pertaining to Jamalpur
Kalan for determining the compensation. He has finally submitted that belting
in the facts of the case was fully justified and in this connection has placed
reliance on 
Executive Director Vs. Sarat Chandra Bisoi and Another
 (2000) 6
SCC 326)


 
14. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through
the record. The location of the land in order to appreciate its potential for the
purpose of compensation has first to be understood.. Admittedly, the land is
situated within the municipal limits of Sonepat which is a district headquarter
adjoining Delhi and within the National Capital Region. The distance between
Bahalgarh, a small township on the Grand Trunk Road, National Highway
No.1, built five centuries ago by Sher Shah Suri (and arguably India's most
important and strategic highway and the lifeline between the rest of India and
the north and northwest), and Sonepat is 7 km., as per the indication on the
National Highway itself. The acquired land is situated on both sides of the
road leading from Bahalgarh to Sonepat with some portions touching the road
side and some portion slightly away and situated behind the ECE factory. It
is, however, the admitted position and (we have seen the location on the
maps that have been produced before us) that the land behind the ECE
factory adjoins the area of village Jamalpur Kalan which had been acquired in
the year 1992 and which the appellants claim should be made the basis for
determining compensation in the present matter as well. It must also be
noticed that the enormous development from the Delhi border alongside the
Grand Trunk Road and well beyond the Bahalgarh - Sonepat bifurcation is
now a matter for all to see and we have seen this on the maps produced in
Court as well, as huge residential and commercial areas have been
developed with a mind boggling increase in the price of agricultural land in the
last 15 or 20 years. While dealing with the question of the potential value of
the land acquired this Court in 
P. Rama Reddy
's case (supra) observed that
several matters had to keep in mind; they being (and we quote),
    "(i) the situation of the acquired land vis-a-vis the city or the town or
    village which had been growing in size because of its commercial,
    industrial, educational, religious or any other kind of importance or
    because of its explosive population;




    (ii) the suitability of the acquired land for putting up the buildings, be they
    residential, commercial or industrial, as the case may be;



    (iii) possibility of obtaining water and electric supply for occupants of
    buildings to be put up on that land;



    (iv) absence of statutory impediments or the like for using th acquired
    land for building purposes;



    (v) existence of highways, public roads, layouts of building plots or
    developed residential extensions in the vicinity or close proximity of the
    acquired land;



    (vi) benefits or advantages or educational institutions, health care centres,
    or the like in the surrounding areas of the acquired land which may
    become available to the occupiers of buildings, if built on the acquired
    land;



    (vii) and lands around the acquired land or the acquired land itself being
    in demand for building purposes, to specify a few.



    15. The material to be so placed on record or made available in respect of
the said matters and the like, cannot have the needed evidentary value for
concluding that the acquired land being used for building purposes in the
immediate or near future unless the same is supported by reliable
documentary evidence, as far as the circumstances permit. When once a
conclusion is reached that there was the possibility of the acquired land being
used for putting up buildings in the immediate or near future, such conclusion
would be sufficient to hold that the acquired land had a building potentiality
and proceed to determine its market value taking into account the increase in
price attributable to such building potentiality."

    16. As already indicated above, these are the broad factors that we too
have kept in mind.



    17. Although, in the present matter, sale instances around or near abouts
the date of Notification of the present acquisition are available yet these
cannot justify or explain the potential of a particular piece of land on the date
of acquisition as the potential can be recognized only some time in the future
and it is open to a landowner claimant to contend that the potential can be
examined first at the time of the 
Section 18
 Reference, the first Appeal in the
High Court or in the Supreme Court in appeal as well. We must also highlight
that Collectors, as agents of the State Government, are extraordinarily chary
in awarding compensation and the land owners have to fight for decades
before they are able to get their due. We take the present case as an
example. The land was notified for acquisition in May 1990. The collector
rendered his award in May 1993 awarding a sum of Rs.2,00,000/- per acre.
The Reference Court by its award dated January 2001 increased the
compensation to Rs.125 per square yard for the land of the road behind the
ECE factory and Rs.150 per square yard for the land abutting the road which
would come to Rs.6,05,000/- and Rs.7,26,000/- respectively for the two
pieces of land. This itself is a huge increase vis-a-vis the Collector's award.
The High Court in First Appeal by its judgment of 24th September 2007
enhanced the compensation for the two categories to Rs.135 and 160
respectively making it Rs.6,53,400/- and Rs.7,74,400/-. In other words, this is
the compensation which ought to have been awarded by the Collector at the
time of his award on 12th May 1993. This has, however, come to the land
owner for the first time as a result of the judgment of the High Court which is
under challenge in this appeal; in other words, a full 17 years from the date of
Notification under 
Section 4
 and 
14
 years from the date of the award of the
Collector on which date the possession of the land must have been taken
from the landowner. Concededly, the Act also provides for the payment of the
solatium, interest and an additional amount but we are of the opinion, and it is
common knowledge, that even these payments do not keep pace with the
astronomical rise in prices in many parts of India, and most certainly in North
India, in the land price and cannot fully compensate for the acquisition of the
land and the payment of the compensation in driblets. The 12% per annum
increase which Courts have often found to be adequate in compensation
matters hardly does justice to those land owners whose land have been
acquired as judicial notice can be taken of the fact that the increase is not 10
or 12 or 15% per year but is often upto 100% a year for land which has the
potential of being urbanized and commercialized such as in the present case.
Be that as it may, we must assume that the landowners were entitled to the
compensation fixed by the High Court on the date of the award of the
Collector and had this amount been made available to the landowners on that
date, it would have been possible for them to rehabilitate their holdings in
some other place. This exercise has been defeated for the simple reason that
the payment of compensation has been spread over almost two decades. In
this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that a landowner is entitled to
say that if the compensation proceedings continued over a period of almost
20 years as in the present case, the potential of the land acquired from him
must also be adjudged keeping in view the development in the area spread
over the period of 20 years if the evidence so permits and cannot be limited to
the near future alone. We, therefore, feel that in the circumstances, the
appellants herein were fully entitled to say that the potential of the acquired
land had not been fully recognized by the High Court or by the Reference
Court. We must add a word of caution here and emphasize that this broad
principle would be applicable where the possession of the land has been
taken pursuant to proceedings under an acquiring Act and not to those cases
where land is already in possession of the Government and is subsequently
acquired.



   18. There is another unfortunate aspect which is for all to see and to
which the Courts turn a Nelson's eye and pretend as if the problem does not
exist. This is a factor which creates an extremely grim situation in a case of
compensation based exclusively on sale instances. This is the wide spread
tendency to under value sale prices. The provision of Collector's rates has
only marginally corrected the anomaly, as these rates are also abnormally
low and do not reflect the true value. Where does all this leave a landowner
whose land is being compulsorily acquired as he has no control over the price
on which some other landowner sells his property which is often the basis for
compensation?



    19. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the above sale instances relied
upon by the parties do not accurately reflect the potential of the acquired land
and the award of the High Court in the case of Jamalpur Kalan granting a
sum of Rs.250/- per square yard as compensation is the minimal proper
base.



 
20. Mr. Goyal has, however, submitted that the belting system ordered by
the reference and the High Court was the proper one in the circumstances,
more particularly as it was well known that land alongside the road had more
value vis.a.vis. the land away therefrom. He has, accordingly, submitted that
the land behind the ECE factory which was not abutting the road needed to
be given lower compensation. Mr. Goyal's reliance on 
Sarat Chandra
's case
for this argument is however to no avail. In this matter, agricultural land which
had no potential for urbanization and commercialization had been acquired
and it was on that basis, this Court held that the belting system was
permissible. In the case before us, admittedly the land was acquired in the
year 1990, had great potential value, and has been completely urbanized as
huge residential complexes, industrial areas and estates and a huge
education city have come up in the last ten or fifteen years. Moreover, insofar
land which is to be used for residential purposes is concerned, a plot away
from the main road is often of more value, as the noise and the air pollution
alongside the arterial roads is almost unbearable. It is also significant that the
land of Jamalpur Kalan was touching the rear side of the ECE factory and the
High Court had granted compensation of Rs.250/- per square yard for the
acquisition of the year 1992. We have also seen the site plan to satisfy
ourselves and find that the land acquired from Jamalpur Kalan and the
present land share a common boundary behind the ECE factory. The belting
system in the facts of the present case would thus not be permissible.




    21. We are, therefore, of the opinion as the said award pertained to the
year 1992, a sum of Rs.225/- per square yard which would come Rs.
10,89000/- per acre would be the adequate compensation in the present case
and for arriving at this figure not only have we computed the value of the land
on the date of the Notification under 
Section 4
 but have also recognized its
potential on the basis of evidence of development in the area around the
Bahalgarh-Sonepat road.



    22. Mr. Shakil Ahmed, the learned counsel appearing in one of the cases
has also prayed that compensation for the building and trees awarded in his
case was inadequate and needed to be enhanced. We are unable to accept
this submission as there is no evidence with regard to the value of these
buildings and trees.



23. For the reasons mentioned above, we allow these appeals and award a sum of
Rs.225/- per square yard as compensation for the entire acquired land and further
direct that the appellants will have all statutory benefits that they would be entitled to
as a consequences of this order. We also direct the respondent State of Haryana or the
beneficiaries, as the case may be, to pay the compensation as enhanced by us by the
end of this year.