Assistant Commercial Tax Officer vs M/S Rijhumal Jeevandas on 15 April, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
2
, Cited by 
0
]










User Queries


special appeal


timber


swatanter kumar


commercial tax


Petition of appeal.


Section 37










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Assistant Commercial Tax Officer vs M/S Rijhumal Jeevandas on 15 April, 2010


Author: 
Swatanter Kumar


Bench: 
Swatanter Kumar
, 
S.H. Kapadia


                                                             REPORTABLE

              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


             CIVIL APPEAL No. ................ OF 2010
                (@ SLP (C) No. 11103 of 2009)


Assistant Commercial Tax Officer                         ...Appellant

                  Versus

M/s. Rijhumal Jeevandas                                  ...Respondent

                             WITH

              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12891 OF 2009)


Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer                       ...Appellant

                          Versus

M/s. Ajit Singh Chandra Prakash                          ...Respondent


              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12893 OF 2009)

Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer                       ...Appellant

                          Versus

M/s. Raj Timber Mart                                     ...Respondent
              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12896 OF 2009)

Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer             ...Appellant

                       Versus

M/s. Ashok Timber Merchant                     ...Respondent


              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12897 OF 2009)


Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer             ...Appellant

                       Versus

M/s. Narayan Das Aadu Mal                      ...Respondent


              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12899 OF 2009)


Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer             ...Appellant

                       Versus

M/s. Mahadev Timber & Furniture                ...Respondent




                                2
              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12902 OF 2009)

Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer             ...Appellant

                       Versus

M/s. Mahadev Timber & Furniture                ...Respondent

              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12903 OF 2009)


Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer             ...Appellant

                       Versus

M/s. Mahadev Timber & Furniture                ...Respondent

              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12906 OF 2009)


Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer             ...Appellant

                       Versus

M/s. Mahadev Timber & Furniture                ...Respondent

              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12909 OF 2009)

Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer             ...Appellant

                       Versus

M/s. Mahaveer Timber Merchant                  ...Respondent

                                3
              CIVIL APPEAL ......... OF 2010
              (@ SLP (C) NO. 12912 OF 2009)

Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer                       ...Appellant

                         Versus

M/s. Mahaveer Timber Merchant                           ...

 Respondent

                           JUDGMENT



Swatanter Kumar, J.





1.      Leave granted.





2.   With the consent of counsel appearing for the parties, the matters

     are heard for final disposal. By this judgment we will dispose of

     all the aforenoticed appeals as common question of law on

     somewhat similar facts arises for consideration of this Court in all

     these appeals. However, for the purpose of brevity and to avoid

     repetition of facts, we would be referring to the facts of SLP (C)

     No. 11103 of 2009.





                                  4


3.   All these aforenoticed appeals, though refer to different

     respondents, all being timber merchants but the principal question

     raised in all these appeals is identical, whether the `ballies' can

     fall under the expression `timber' so as to justify levying of higher

     sales tax.





4.   M/s. Rijhumal Jeevandas (hereinafter referred to as `the assessee')

     is a concern, trading in `timber' and its allied products. The

     Assessing Officer vide his Order dated 17th November, 2000,

     passed an order of assessment against the assessee wherein he

     levied tax at the rate of 8% i.e. Rs. 5,75,580/- on the `ballies'

     which, according to the Department, comes within the category of

     `timber' and thus, the tax ought to have been levied at the rate of

     12%. On this premise, a notice was issued by the authority for

     amending the assessing order under 
Section 37
 of the Rajasthan

     Sales Tax Act, 1994 (for short `the Act'). Despite service of

     notice, none had appeared on behalf of the assessee and the

     differential tax at the rate of 4% was levied totaling to Rs.

     23,023/-.    Further, the authorities imposed surcharge of Rs.




                                5

     2,763/- and interest of Rs. 26,302/-, and raised a total further

     demand of Rs. 52,088/-.





5.   Against the aforesaid order of assessment, the assessee preferred

     an   appeal      before   the       Deputy   Commissioner     (Appeals),

     Commercial Tax Department, Kota. The main argument raised

     was that the order was beyond the purview and scope of 
Section

     37
 of the Act. The `ballies' could not be treated to be covered

     under the head `timber' and, as such, the entire demand was

     vitiated in law.





6.   The aforesaid appeal was allowed. The appellate authority found

     that, the `ballies' comes under the category of `goods' and not

     under the category of `building goods'.        Thus, the differential tax

     levied by the Tax Assessment Officer, assuming `ballies' to be

     `timber' was not justified. Consequently, the entire demand itself

     was set aside.





7.   The order of the appellate authority dated 18th October, 2006 was

     challenged by the Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer, Ward -III,

     Circle-B, Kota, before Rajasthan Tax Board, Ajmer which vide its


                                     6

     judgment dated 11th June, 2007 found that the `ballies' are not

     `timber' and upheld the view taken by the First Appellate

     Authority and dismissed the appeals preferred by the Department.



8.   Aggrieved by the Order of the Rajasthan Tax Board, Ajmer the

     Department preferred a revision under 
Section 86
 of the Act and

     besides referring to the facts, the following questions of law were

     framed for consideration of the High Court :





         "(i)    Whether in the facts and circumstances of the matter
                 the order passed by the assessing authority was in any
                 manner inappropriate for the purpose of interference by
                 the appellate authorities ?



         (ii)    Whether the Appellate Authorities were justified in
                 interfering with the orders passed by the assessing
                 authority which related to appreciation of entire record
                 and facts ?



         (iii)   Whether the appellate authorities justifies in drawing
                 the wrong conclusion while misinterpreting the
                 provisions of the 
Section 37
 of the Act of 1994 which
                 relates to rectification of an order ?



         (iv)    Whether the goods/good used and dealt with by the
                 respondent assesses could be classified as not timber so
                 as to enable the respondent assesses to pay tax @ 8%
                 while bally comes in the category of timber wood and
                 upon which the tax is payable @ 12%?"



                                7


9.        This revision petition came to be dismissed by the High Court

      vide its Order dated 7th July, 2008. The said Order reads as under


      :



                                "After having carefully gone through
                   material on record, since after due consideration proper
                   discretion has already been used by the Deputy
                   Commissioner (Appeals) as also the Rajasthan Tax
                   Board, in the facts and circumstances, no further
                   interference is called for by this Court.



                               The revision petition        is   dismissed
                   accordingly as having no merits."





10.   The present appeals had been preferred by the Department against

      the order dated 7th July, 2008 passed by the High Court. The

      primary challenge, to the legality and correctness of the order, is

      that there is no discussion either on the facts or on the questions of

      law raised in the revision petition before the High Court and in the

      argument addressed during the time of hearing of the revision

      petition.





11.   With some regret, we are constrained to notice that the cryptic

      orders like the above, have not only been passed in the present

      appeals, but identical orders had even been passed by the High


                                  8

Court in large number of cases from which the appeals have been

preferred before this Court. Identical orders, though in different

revision petitions dealing with different facts, parties and

questions of law, running into 4 lines, like the present one, have

been passed, even without variation of a coma or a full stop. It

also needs to be noticed that the grounds raised by the Department

before us cannot be said to be frivolous or untenable which

required discussion by the High Court. The orders, besides being

cryptic, suffer from basic infirmity of non application of mind and

non-speaking orders in law. This ground need not detain us any

further as even in other cases where identical orders were passed,

this Court had the occasion to consider the same grounds at some

length. Reference, in this regard, can be made to the judgment of

the date, the Bench, in the case of Assistant Commissioner v. M/s

Shukla & Brothers (SLP (C) No. 16466 of 2009) decided on the

same day, where after discussing the law at some length, the order

passed by the High Court was set aside and the case was

remanded to the High Court for hearing the case de novo and

passing of an order in accordance with law afresh.



                          9


12.   In view of the ratio of the case of M/s. Shukla & Brothers (supra),

      which is squarely applicable on the fact and law to the present

      case, we are constrained to set aside the order passed by the High

      Court and remand the matter to the High Court for hearing the

      case de novo. We are compelled to make this direction as it was

      expected of the High Court to consider the question of law raised

      before it and express its own opinion/reasons.



13.   For the reasons stated above and the reasons recorded in the case

      of M/s. Shukla & Brothers (supra), we hereby set aside the

      impugned orders of the High Court and remand the matters to

      the High Court for hearing the same de novo and pass orders in

      accordance with law. However, in the facts and circumstances of

      the case, there shall be no order as to costs.

      To that extent the appeals are allowed.





                                                ........................................J.
                                                            [ S.H. KAPADIA ]





                                 10

                        ........................................J.
                      [ SWATANTER KUMAR ]
New Delhi
April 15, 2010





                 11