Thammaiah Gowda vs Shekar & Ors on 20 April, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
0
, Cited by 
0
]














Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Thammaiah Gowda vs Shekar & Ors on 20 April, 2010


Bench: 
K.S. Radhakrishnan
, 
Aftab Alam


                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.2899 OF 2002


Thammaiah Gowda                                      ...Appellant(s)

                                   Versus

Shekar and Ors.                                     ...Respondent(s)


                              O    R   D   E   R


          The High Court's Order against which this appeal is
preferred directed for the appellant's ejectment from the
land forming the subject-matter of the writ petition.                         The
appellant came to this Court making the grievance that the
order was passed in a public interest litigation and it went
beyond the relief claimed in the writ petition.                   Though leave
was granted for filing appeal, this Court did not pass any
interim order in the appellant's favour.                       On notice being
issued, a counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the
State     stating   that,     in   pursuance        of    the    High     Court's
direction, the appellant was dispossessed from the disputed
land (which happens to be a forest land) and the State has
resumed its possession.

          When the case was called out, Mr. Rajesh Mahale, who
is the Advocate-on-record, filed an interlocutory application
for     his   discharge     from   this     case.         In    the     discharge
application it is stated that on receipt of a copy of the
counter affidavit filed on behalf of the State, he sought
further instructions from the appellant or his son, but he
never received any response from them.                   The relevant extract
from the application for discharge is reproduced below:

                                                                          ....2/-

                                  - 2 -

                "Although    the     Advocates   for   the
        Appellant have informed him of the listing of
        the case and the developments, there has been
        no communication, information or instructions
        from the Appellant to his Advocates.           The
        Applicant has tried to obtain instructions
        from the Appellant as to the developments in
        the case.      No instructions are forthcoming
        from   the    Appellant    or   his   son.     The
        Applicant's    colleague    Mr.   Raghavendra   S.
        Srivatsa, Advocate who is handling this case
        has contacted the Appellant and his son on
        several    occasions    and   has   also   written
        letters.    Finally, under cover of the letter
        dated January 16, 2010, the Advocates for the
        Appellant have informed him that they will
        withdraw from the case and that....."



          In   these   circumstances,     we    allow   the   prayer   for
discharge and direct that the vakalatnama filed on behalf of
the appellant be cancelled and he be discharged from this
case.

          This is not the end of the matter.              The discharge
application clearly indicates that the appellant has lost
interest in the matter and he is no longer interested in
prosecuting     the    appeal.   In   that   circumstance,     the   civil
appeal is dismissed for non-prosecution.



                                               ......................J.
                                               [AFTAB ALAM]



                                               ......................J.
                                               [K.S. RADHAKRISHNAN]
New Delhi,
April 20, 2010.