State Bank Of Travancore vs M/S Kingston Computers(I) P.Ltd on 22 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
2
, Cited by 
164
]










Top AI Tags


companies-law






User Queries


how company can file  suit


 kingston computers


letter of authority


board resolution 


suit by company


board of directors


directors company










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


State Bank Of Travancore vs M/S Kingston Computers(I) P.Ltd on 22 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 1948, 2011 (11) SCC 524, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 786, (2011) 3 CIVILCOURTC 179, (2011) 1 CLR 679 (SC), (2011) 5 MAD LJ 842, (2011) 4 PUN LR 120, (2011) 102 CORLA 124, (2011) 3 SCALE 33, (2011) 3 ALL WC 2931, (2011) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 470, 2011 (3) KCCR SN 305 (SC)


Bench: 
Asok Kumar Ganguly
, 
G.S.Singhvi


                                                    1



                                                              Non-reportable

                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA                             
                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL No.2014 OF 2011 
                  (Arising out of SLP(C)No.18179 of 2009)
                                          

STATE BANK OF TRAVANCORE                           .......APPELLANT



                                      VERSUS



M/S KINGSTON COMPUTERS(I) P.LTD.                  .......RESPONDENT 




                             J U D G M E N T



      Delay condoned.



      Leave granted.



      This appeal is directed against the judgment of the Division 

Bench   of   the   Delhi   High   Court   whereby   the   appeal   preferred   by 

respondent-M/s.Kingston Computers (I) Private Limited (hereinafter 

referred to as "the company") was allowed and the suit filed by it 

for recovery of Rs.8,50,952/- along with interest of Rs.3,06,342/- 

was   decreed   by   reversing   the   judgment   of   Additional   District 

Judge, Delhi (hereinafter referred to as "the trial Court").


      The   suit   was   filed   by   the   respondent   through   Shri   Ashok 

K.Shukla,   who   described   himself   as   one   of   the   Directors   of   the 

company and claimed that he was authorised by Shri Raj K.Shukla, 

the Chief Executive Officer of the company vide authority letter 



                                          2




dated   02.01.2003   to   sign,   verify   and   file   suit   for   recovery   on 

behalf of the company.   A copy of the authority letter allegedly 

signed by Shri Raj K.Shukla was also annexed with the plaint.  In 

the   written   statement   filed   on   behalf   of   the   appellant,   a 

preliminary objection was taken to the maintainability of the suit 

on the ground that Shri Ashok K.Shukla was not authorised by the 

company to file the suit and the authority letter given by Shri 

Raj   K.Shukla   was   not   sufficient   to   entitle   him   to   do   so.     The 

respondent   filed   replication   but   did   not   plead   that   Shri   Ashok 

K.Shukla was authorised by the company to file the suit.


      On the pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed the 

following issues :-



            "1.    Whether  the  suit  has  been  signed,  verified 
            and filed by a duly authorised person?



            2.        What   is   the   effect   of   not   joining 
            Sh.Debashish   Saraswati   in   the   present   suit?



            3.       Whether   any   loss   has   been   caused   by   the 
            defendant             to            the           plaintiff?



            4.     Whether   payments   have   been   made   by   the 
            defendant   in   due   course   and   in   good   faith   as 
            alleged   in   para-3   of   the   preliminary   objections 
            of the written statement if so its effect?



              5.       Whether   the   plaintiff   is   entitled   to   the 
            suit amount?



              6.     Whether   the   plaintiff   is   entitled   to 
            interest, if so at what rate and for what period?



              7.     Relief."



      After considering the pleadings and evidence of the parties, 



                                         3




the trial Court decided all the issues except issue No.1 in favour 

of   the   company   but   dismissed   the   suit   on   the   ground   that   Shri 

Ashok K.Shukla was not authorised to file the same.  


      The Division  Bench of  the High  Court allowed  the appeal  of 

the company, reversed the judgment of the trial Court and decreed 

the suit by relying upon the letter of authority issued by Shri 

Raj K.Shukla in favour of Shri Ashok K.Shukla.


      Shri   J.L.   Gupta,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the 

appellant assailed the impugned judgment and argued that the High 

Court committed serious error by reversing the finding recorded by 

the trial Court on issue No.1 totally ignoring that the respondent 

had not  produced any  evidence to  prove that  Shri Ashok  K.Shukla 

was a Director of the company and he had been authorised by the 

company   to   file   the   suit.     Learned   senior   counsel     extensively 

referred to the pleadings of the parties including the rejoinder 

filed on behalf of the company before the trial Court, evidence of 

Shri Ashok K.Shukla and argued that the suit could not have been 

decreed because no evidence was produced on behalf of the company 

to   prove   that   Shri   Ashok   K.Shukla   was   authorised   to   file   the 

suit.  Shri Gupta pointed out that resolutions dated 14.2.2001 and 

19.4.2001   passed   by   the   Board   of   Directors   of   the   company   had 

bearing only on the issue of operating the bank account and not on 

the issue of filing the suit and the Division Bench of the High 

Court   gravely   erred   in   relying   upon   those   resolutions   and   the 



                                        4




authority letter issued by Shri Raj K. Shukla in favour of Shri 

Ashok K. Shukla.



     We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel and 

scrutinized the record. 



     In paragraph 1 of the suit filed on behalf of the company, it 

was pleaded that Shri Ashok K.Shukla is one of the Directors of 

the company and he has been authorised by Shri Raj K.Shukla, the 

Chief Executive Officer vide authority letter dated 2.1.2003 to do 

the following things:



     (i)    to sign, verify and file a suit for recovery on behalf 

     of   the   company   against   the   State   Bank   of   Travancore,   R.K. 

     Puram Branch, New Delhi,


     (ii) to   sign,   verify   and   file   any   document,   application   to 

     lead evidence, make statement or compromise the matter before 

     the Hon'ble Court, 


     (iii)to   appoint   any   advocate   or   pleader   or   counsel   and   to 

     sign vakalatnama,


     (iv)to represent the company or appear on its behalf before 

     the concerned Court, any public authority or Tribunal and to 

     represent for the purpose of representing the company, and 


     (v)    to   do   all   other   acts,   deeds   and   things   whatever   is 

     necessary   for   pursuing   the   case   of   recovery   against   State 

     Bank of Travancore which are not specifically mentioned.  



     In the written statement filed on behalf of the appellant, an 



                                          5




objection   was   taken   to   the   maintainability   of   the   suit   on   the 

ground that the plaint has not been signed, verified and filed by 

a competent and authorised representative on behalf of the company 

and that there is neither any valid Board resolution nor any valid 

authorisation   on   behalf   of   the   company   nor   a   copy   of   the 

resolution   has   been   filed   along   with   the   suit.     It   was   also 

pleaded that the person who has instituted the suit on behalf of 

the company is not shown to be a power of attorney holder nor a 

copy of such power of attorney has been filed with the plaint and 

the authorisation letter purported to have been given by the so-

called Chief Executive Officer is not a valid authorisation.  


      In   the   rejoinder   filed   on   behalf   of   the   company,   it   was 

reiterated that Shri Ashok K.Shukla, who has signed, verified and 

filed   the   plaint   was   authorised   by   Shri   Raj   K.Shukla   vide 

authority letter dated 2.1.2003.  



      In his evidence, which was filed in the form of an affidavit, 

Shri Ashok K.Shukla claimed that he is one of the Directors of the 

company   and   has   been   authorised   by   Shri   Raj   K.Shukla   vide 

authority   letter   dated   2.1.2003   to   file   the   suit.     In   cross-

examination,   Shri   Ashok   K.Shukla   claimed   that   he   was   the   only 

Director   in   the   company   and   that   the   Board   of   Directors   of   the 

company   had   passed   resolution   authorising   Shri   Raj   K.Shukla   to 

take   decisions   independently.   He   also   claimed   that   he   had   been 

given power of attorney on behalf of the company, which was filed 



                                         6




on record.  He however  admitted that  no resolution  was passed  by 

the Board  of Directors  authorising him  to sign,  verify and  file 

the plaint.



      The   trial   Court   analyzed   the   pleadings   and   evaluated   the 

evidence   produced   by   the   parties,   referred   to   authority   letter 

dated 2.1.2003 issued by Shri Raj K.Shukla in favour of Shri Ashok 

K.Shukla and observed:



            "A   perusal   of   the   aforesaid   authority   letter 
            shows   that   Shri   Raj   K.Shukla   in   his   capacity   as 
            CEO of the plaintiff company had authorised Shri 
            A.K. Shukla to sign, verify and file the present 
            suit.     Apart   from   this   authority   letter,   the 
            plaintiff   company   has   not   filed   on   record   any 
            board   resolution   authorising   Sh.   A.K.   Shukla   to 
            sign, verify and institute the present suit.  The 
            plaintiff   has   also   not   filed   on   record   its 
            memorandum/articles   to   show   that   Shri   Raj   Kumar 
            Shukla   had   been   vested   with   the   powers   or   had 
            been given a general power of attorney on behalf 
            of the company to sign, verify and institute the 
            suit on behalf of the company.  The present suit, 
            therefore, has been filed merely on the strength 
            of the authority letter Ex.PW1/A............"



 
The trial  Court then  referred to  the judgment  of the  Delhi 

High   Court   in   M/s.   
Nibro   Limited   v.   National   Insurance   Company 

Limited
 
AIR   1991   Delhi   25,   Shubh   Shanti   Services   Limited   v. 

Manjula S.Agarwalla and others
 (2005) 5 SCC 30, Delhi High Court 

(original side) Rules, 1967 and proceeded to observe:


            "..............As already stated, it has not been 
            averred in the plaint nor sought to be proved that 
            any   resolution   had   been   passed   by   the   Board   of 
            Directors   of   the   plaintiff   company   authorising 
            Shri A.K. Shukla to sign, verify and institute the 
            suit.     It   has   also   not   been   averred   that   the 
            memorandum/articles of the plaintiff company give 



                                          7




            any right to Shri A.K. Shukla to sign, verify and 
            institute   a   suit   on   behalf   of   the   plaintiff 
            company.   It, therefore, follows that the plaint 
            has   been   instituted   by   Shri   A.K.   Shukla   only   on 
            the   authority   of   Sh.   Raj   K.Shukla,   CEO   of   the 
            plaintiff   company.     Such   an   authority   is   not 
            recognized under law and, therefore, I held that 
            the   plaint   has   not   been   instituted   by   an 
            authorised   person.     Issue   No.1   is   accordingly, 
            decided against the plaintiff and in favour of the 
            defendants."



      The Division Bench of the High Court did take cognizance of 

the fact that the company had not summoned any witness from the 

office   of   the   Registrar   of   Company   to   prove   that   Shri   Ashok 

K.Shukla was a Director of the company and that the minute book of 

the company had not been produced to prove the appointment of Shri 

Ashok   K.Shukla   as   a   Director,   but   reversed   the   finding   of   the 

trial   Court   on   issue   No.1   on   the   basis   of   the   authority   letter 

issued   by   Shri   Raj   K.Shukla   and   resolutions   dated   14.2.2001   and 

19.4.2001,   by   which   the   Board   of   Directors   of   the   company   had 

authorised some persons to operate the bank account.


      In our view, the judgment under challenge is liable to be set 

aside   because   the   respondent   had   not   produced   any   evidence   to 

prove that Shri Ashok K.Shukla was appointed as a Director of the 

company and a resolution was passed by the Board of Directors of 

the company to file suit against the appellant and authorised Shri 

Ashok K.Shukla to do so. The letter of authority issued by Shri 

Raj K.Shukla, who described himself as the Chief Executive Officer 

of   the   company,   was   nothing   but   a   scrap   of   paper   because   no 



                                        8




resolution   was   passed   by   the   Board   of   Directors   delegating   its 

powers to  Shri Raj  K.Shukla to  authorise another  person to  file 

suit on behalf of the company.



      In the result, the appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment 

is set aside and the one passed by the trial Court dismissing the 

suit of the respondent is restored.   The appellant shall be free 

to withdraw the amount deposited by it in the trial Court in terms 

of this Court's order dated 24.7.2009.  



      Since the respondent has not appeared to contest the appeal, 

the costs are made easy.





                                      ...........................J. 
                                           ( G.S.SINGHVI ) 

                                                                               
                                                                     
                                         ............................J. 
                                           ( ASOK KUMAR GANGULY )



NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 22, 2011.





9