Ram Narayan Tiwari vs Union Of India & Ors on 21 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
12
, Cited by 
5
]










Top AI Tags


army


air-force






User Queries


dismissal from service


court martial


the army act, 1950


martial


army act 


air force


army


allahabad high court


" court martial"


"army act"


forfeiture 


Chargesheet 


district court










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Ram Narayan Tiwari vs Union Of India & Ors on 21 February, 2011


Author: 
Mukundakam Sharma


Bench: 
Mukundakam Sharma
, 
Anil R. Dave


                                                       1

                                                       REPORTABLE

                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA




                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION





                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1978  OF 2011

                        [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15218 of 2007]





lRam Narayan Tiwari                                   .... Appellant





 Versus





Union   of 

India          & 

Ors.

              .... 





Respondent




                                      JUDGMENT



Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J.



                     l1.Leave granted.



                            2


l2. The present  appeal is directed  against the judgment and 



  order   dated   06.04.2007   passed   by   the   Division   Bench   of 



  the   Allahabad   High   Court   dismissing   the   appeal   filed   by 



  the   appellant   herein   and   confirming   the   judgment   and 



  order   passed   by   the   learned   single   Judge   in   the   Writ 



  Petitioner No. 2341 of 1990.



l3. In order to appreciate the contentions raised  before  us it 



  will be necessary to set out the brief facts of the case. The 



  appellant while serving as Corporal in the Indian Air Force 




  -   Police   Wing   was   served   with   a   chargesheet   dated 



  20.03.1980   containing   three   charges   which   were   in   the 



  following manner: -



                             3


        l1.Committed   carnal   intercourse   against   the  

           order of  nature with Sanjay Kumar minor on  

           15.03.1980;





        l2.Consumed   `Ganja'   while   on   duty   on   the  

           same date; and


        l3.Left  his  place  of   duty  for   half   an  hour   and  

           the room remained unattended.



l4.   However,   subsequently,   another   amended   chargesheet 





  was   served   upon   him   wherein   the   charges,   namely, 



  "consuming   Ganja   while   on   duty"   and   "remaining   absent 



  from   duty"   were   dropped.   The   first   charge   of   the   first 



  chargesheet  was  retained  and  another  charge  to the  effect 



  as   shown   was   included   therein,   namely,   "he   placed   his 



  penis in the region of the exposed buttock of master Sanjay 



                               4


   Kumar aged about 9 years". 



l5.   Thereafter   the   appellant   was   tried   in   the   District   Court 



   Martial.   Witnesses   were   examined   and   after   conclusion   of 



   the   trial,   the   District   Court   Martial   found   charge   No.   1  as 



   not   proved   but   held   that   the   charge   No.   2   stood   proved. 



   Consequent   to   the   findings   so   recorded,   punishment   of 





   three months detention and reduction in rank was awarded 



   to the appellant. As per the provisions of the 
Air Force Act, 



   1950
 the aforesaid findings as well as the punishment were 



   subject   to   confirmation   by   the   Confirming   Authority, 



   consequently,   the   records   were   placed   before   the 



   Confirming Authority which confirmed the said findings but 



                             5


  commuted the punishment of detention for three months to 



  dismissal from service vide order dated 07.08.1980. 



l6. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the appellant filed 



  Writ   Petition   No.   8251   of   1980   before   the   Allahabad   High 



  Court   challenging   the   order   dated   07.08.1980.   The   said 



  Writ   Petition   was   dismissed   by   the   High   Court   vide 





  judgment   and   order   dated   21.02.1985.   However,   the   said 



  judgment and order was challenged before this Court which 



  was   registered   as   Criminal   Appeal   No.   421   of   1989.   This 



  Court   by   its   order   dated   10.07.1989   remanded   the   case 



  back   to   the   Confirming   Authority   with   the   following 



  observations: -



                              6


     "In view of  the facts and the circumstances of  the  

     case,   the   order   dated   the   7th  August,   1980  

     confirming the findings and sentence by the Court  

     Martial is set aside. The  matter should go back to  

     the   Confirming   Authority  for   reconsideration  and  

     confirmation, in accordance with the law."





l7. In  view  of the  aforesaid  findings  and  directions  recorded 



  by this Court the matter was once  again placed  before  the 





  Confirming Authority which reconsidered the matter. Upon 



  such   reconsideration   a   revised   confirmation   order   was 



  passed   by   the   Confirming   Authority   on   30.10.1989   by 



  which   the   finding   as   well   as   the   sentence   awarded   by   the 



  District   Court   Martial   was   confirmed.   However,   the 



  Confirming   Authority   commuted   the   punishment   of   the 



                               7


   detention   for   three   months   to   dismissal   from   service.   The 



   said   order   was   challenged   by   the   appellant   by   filing   Writ 



   Petition No. 2341  of 1990 before  the learned single  Judge, 



   Allahabad High Court which was dismissed  by order dated 



   26.07.2000. 



l8.   Being   aggrieved   by   the   aforesaid   judgment   and   order   a 





   special   appeal   was   filed   before   the   Division   Bench   of   the 



   Allahabad   High   Court   which   was   registered   as   Special 



   Appeal   No.   569   of   2000.   Before   the   Division   Bench   the 



   counsel   appearing   for   the   appellant   contended   that   the 



   appellant   is   not   aggrieved   by   the   findings   recorded   by   the 



   District Court Martial or by the Confirming Authority at all 



                            8


and   the   sole   contention   that   was   raised   by   the   counsel, 



apparently  on instructions from the  appellant, was that in 



exercise   of   powers   under   
Section   157
   of   the   Air  Force   Act 



[for   short   "the   Act"],   the   Confirming   Authority   could 



mitigate,   remit   or   commute   the   sentence   but   could   not 



enhance the punishment. Therefore, in a nutshell what was 





submitted   was   that   the   punishment   of   dismissal   from   the 



service   was   more   severe   and   harsher   than   serving   three 



months'   detention   and,   therefore,   the   order   passed   by  the 



Confirming Authority altering the punishment given by the 



District Court Martial was not permissible.



                                9


l9. In support of the said contention reference was made and 



  reliance was placed on 
Section 73
 of the Act which reads as 



  follows: -



  "73.   Punishments   awardable   by   courts-martial   -  

  Punishments   may   be   inflicted   in   respect   of   offence  

  committed   by   persons   subject   to   this   Act   and  

  convicted   by   courts-martial   according   to   the   scale  

  following, that is to say -





  (a)  death;





  (b)     transportation  for   life   or   for   any   period   not   less  

  than seven years, in respect of civil offences;



  (c)     imprisonment,   either   rigorous   or   simple,   for   any  

  period not exceeding fourteen years;



  (d)     detention   for   a  term   not  exceeding   two   years   in  

  the case of airmen;





  (e)  cashiering, in the case of officers;



  (f)  dismissal from service;





                             10


(g)     reduction   to   the   ranks   or   to   a   lower   rank   or  

classification, in the case of warrant officers and non-


commissioned officers;



Provided   that  a  warrant  officer   reduced   to  the   ranks  

shall   not   be   required   to   serve   in   the   ranks   as   an  

airman;



(h)     forfeiture   of   seniority   of   rank,   in   the   case   of  

officers,   warrant   officers   and   non-commissioned  

officers,   and   forfeiture   of   all   or   any   part   of   their  

service   for   the   purpose   of   promotion,   in   the   case   of  

any of them whose promotion depends upon length of  





service;



(i)     forfeiture  of   service   for   the  purpose   of   increased  

pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose;



(j)     severe   reprimand   or   reprimand,   in   the   case   of  

officers,   warrant   officer   and   non-commissioned  

officers;



(k)   forfeiture of  pay and allowances for a period not  

exceeding   three   months  for   an   offence   committed   on  

active service;



                               11


  (l)     forfeiture   in   the   case   of   a   person   sentenced   to  

  cashiering or dismissal from the service, of all arrears  

  of pay and allowances and other public money due to  

  him at the time of such cashiering or dismissal;



  (m)  stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved  

  loss or damage occasioned by the offence of which he  

  is convicted is made good."



l10.The Division Bench of the High Court, however, held that 





  the   aforesaid   provision   of   the   Act   provides   for   a   scale 



  according   to   the   severity   of   the   punishment   and   that 



  detention   has   been  placed   higher   than  the   dismissal  from 



  service in the said scale and, therefore, it is difficult to hold 



  that   by   commuting   the   punishment   of   three   months 



  detention   and   imposing   the   punishment   of   dismissal,   the 



                              12


   Confirming   Authority   has   imposed   a   harsher   punishment. 



   Having   held   thus,   the   appeal   filed   by   the   appellant   was 



   dismissed. No other issue was either raised or discussed by 



   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court   and,   therefore,   the 



   present   appeal   is   also   restricted   and   confined   only   to   the 



   aforesaid issue.



l11.   Counsel   appearing   for   the   appellant   placed   reliance   on 



   
Section   73
   of   the   Act   and   submitted   that   the   order   of 



   dismissal   is   a   more   severe   punishment   than   the   order   of 



   reduction   in   rank   and   short-term   confinement.   Counsel 



   also   submitted   that   awarding   two   sentences   in   respect   of 



   one offence is manifestly illegal.



                              13


l12.Counsel   appearing   for   the   respondent,   however,   refuted 



   the   aforesaid   submission   and   submitted   that   detention 



   under  the  aforesaid   
Section   73
  of  the  Act   is  considered   to 



   be   a   harsher   punishment   than   the   dismissal   from   service 



   and,   therefore,   the   order   of   punishment   awarded   against 



   the appellant is legal and valid.



l13.We   considered   the   aforesaid   submission   in   the   light   of 



   the  records   of  the   case.   
Section   73
  of  the  Act   provides  for 



   scale  of punishment. According to the said scale, the most 



   severe   punishment   under   the   said   provision   is   considered 



   to be the punishment of death and, therefore, the same has 



   been   put   on   the   top   followed   by   imprisonment,   detention, 



                               14


   cashiering,   dismissal   from   service   and   then   other   lesser 



   punishments. The Confirming Authority has commuted the 



   punishment   of   three   months   detention   and   imposed   the 



   punishment  of dismissal  and, since,  the  punishment  itself 



   is   of   dismissal   from   service   there   is   no   question   of   his 



   reduction   to   the   ranks   at   all.   Therefore,   it   cannot   be   said 





   that,   in   fact,   two   punishments   have   been   awarded   to   the 



   appellant for one single offence.



l14.   With   regard   to   the   issue   of   awarding   of   punishment   by 



   the   Confirming   Authority,   almost   a   similar   issue   came   up 



   for consideration before  this Court in the case of  
Union of 



                             15


  India   and   others   v.   R.K.   Sharma
  reported   in  (2001)   9 


  SCC 592 which was a case relating to the provisions of the 



  
Army   Act,   1950
,   viz.,   
Sections   71
   &   
72
,   which   are 



  practically pari materia with the 
Air Force Act
.




l15. We have considered  
the said decision
 in the light of said 



  sections   of   the   
Army   Act
.   On   going   through   
the   said 





  decision
   we   find   that  
Section   71
   of   the   Army   Act,  1950   is 



  pari materia  with 
Section 73
  of the Air Force  Act, 1950.  In 



  
the   said   decision
   this   Court   held   that   
Section   72
   of   the 



  Army   Act   merely   provides   that   the   Court   Martial   may,   on 



  convicting a person, award either the punishment which is 



  provided   for   the   offence   or   any   of   the   lesser   punishments 



                             16


set   out   in   the   scale   in   
Section   71
.   It   was   also   held   that 




Section   71
   does   not   set   out   that   in   all   the   cases   a   lesser 



punishment   must   be   awarded   and,   therefore,   merely 



because   a   lesser   punishment   is   not   granted   it   would   not 



mean   that   the   punishment   was   violative   of   
Section   72
   of 



the   Act.   It   was   further   held   that   dismissal   from   service 





provided in item (e) of 
Section 71
 of the Army Act, 1950 as 



one   of   the   punishments   according   to   scale   is   a   lesser 



punishment   than   imprisonment   as   contemplated   under 




Section   57
   and   
63
   of   the   Army   Act.   In   our   considered 



opinion the ratio of the aforesaid  decision squarely  applies 



to the facts of the present case.




                              17


l16. Counsel appearing for the appellant also submitted that 



   the   punishment   awarded   to   the   appellant   was   too   severe 



   and   harsh   considering   the   nature   and   the   degree   of   the 



   offences   established.   The   appellant   belongs   to   Air   Force, 



   which is a disciplined service. The allegations made against 



   the appellant were  serious. The  charge number (2) against 





   him   stood   proved.   The   said   charge   is   also   serious   and   we 



   are   of   the   considered   opinion   that   for   an   offence   of   the 



   aforesaid   nature   the   authority   was   justified   in   awarding 



   him the punishment of dismissal from service. 



l17.   The   scale   of   punishment   provided   in   
Section   73
   of   the 



                              18


   Act clearly confirms the position that dismissal from service 



   is a lesser punishment than that of detention in prison. By 



   commuting the punishment of three months detention and 



   imposing   the   punishment   of   dismissal,   the   Confirming 



   Authority   has   strictly   followed   the   scale   of   punishment 



   provided for in 
Section 73
 of the Act and, therefore, there is 





   no   justification   for   any   interference   with   the   nature   of 



   punishment awarded to the appellant. 



l18.   We,   therefore,   hold   that   there   was   no   violation   of   the 



provisions   of   
Section   73
   of   the   Air   Force   Act,   1950.   The 



appeal, therefore, has not merit and is dismissed accordingly, 



                                           19


              but without costs.



                                                    ............................................J

                                                  [Dr. Mukundakam Sharma ]





                                                                                               ....



                                                                                 ..................



                                                                                 ..................



                                                                                     ....J





                                                  [ Anil R. Dave ]





New Delhi,

February 21, 2011.