Md.Sukur Ali vs State Of Assam on 24 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
7
, Cited by 
156
]










Top AI Tags


protection-of-life-and-liberty


procedure-for-cases-of-contempt-by-public-servants


criminal-procedure-code






User Queries


article 21


article 21 of constitution


personal liberty


article 22(1)


amicus curiae


article 22


article 1


"amicus curiae"


"article 21"


Article 21  filter:  case laws










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Md.Sukur Ali vs State Of Assam on 24 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 1222, 2011 (4) SCC 729, 2011 AIR SCW 1352, AIR 2011 SC (CRIMINAL) 613, 2011 (2) AIR KANT HCR 530, 2011 (2) SCC(CRI) 481, 2011 (2) SCALE 730, 2011 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 232, (2011) 1 CRILR(RAJ) 232, (2011) 2 JCR 301 (SC), (2011) 3 MH LJ (CRI) 286, (2011) 75 ALLCRIC 780, 2011 CRILR(SC&MP) 232, 2011 (2) KCCR 168 SN, (2011) 2 BOMCR(CRI) 291, (2011) 1 ORISSA LR 1014, (2011) 2 ALLCRILR 528, (2011) 1 KER LT 881, (2011) 1 CURCRIR 529, (2011) 48 OCR 1055, (2011) 2 PAT LJR 67, (2011) 2 RECCRIR 121, (2011) 2 SCALE 730, (2011) 2 GAU LT 26, (2011) 1 DLT(CRL) 720


Bench: 
Gyan Sudha Misra
, 
Markandey Katju


                                                            REPORTABLE


                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  546       OF 2011
           (arising out of S.L.P. (CRL.) No(s).679 of 2011)



     MD.SUKUR ALI                                  Appellant(s)

                                  VERSUS

     STATE OF ASSAM                               Respondent(s)


                                O  R  D  E  R

          Leave granted.



          Heard learned counsel for the parties.





          We have also heard Mr. Fali S. Nariman, learned senior 

     counsel, who very kindly consented to assist us as  Amicus 

     Curiae  in   this   case   in   which   an   important   constitutional 

     and legal question is involved.





          That   question   is   whether   in   a   criminal   case   if   the 

     counsel   for   the   accused   does   not   appear,   for   whatever 

     reasons, should the case be decided in the absence of the 

     counsel against the accused, or the Court should appoint an 

     amicus curiae to defend the accused ?





          In   the   present   case,   it   appears   that   Criminal   Appeal 

     137 of 2003  was  decided  by   the  Gauhati High  Court on


                                        :1:



01.06.2010 in the absence of the counsel for the appellant-

accused and the conviction was upheld.



      Mr. Nariman, learned senior counsel, pointed out that 

earlier   the   counsel   for   the   appellant-accused   was 

Mr.   A.S.   Choudhury   but   the   appellant   changed   his   counsel 

and   appointed   Mr.   B.   Sinha   in   the   year   2007   as   his   new 

counsel,   and   this   fact   is   corroborated   by   affidavit. 

Unfortunately,   the   name   of   Mr.   Sinha   as   counsel   for   the 

appellant was not shown in the cause list when the case was 

listed and the name of the former counsel Mr. Choudhury was 

shown.    In these  circumstances, Mr.  Sinha who  was engaged 

by the appellant as his new counsel did not appear.


      We   are   of   the   opinion   that   even   assuming   that   the 

counsel   for   the   accused   does   not   appear   because   of   the 

counsel's   negligence   or   deliberately,   even   then   the   Court 

should   not   decide   a   criminal   case   against   the   accused   in 

the absence of his counsel since an accused in a criminal 

case should not suffer for the fault of his counsel and in 

such a situation the Court should appoint   another counsel 

as  amicus   curiae  to   defend   the   accused.     This   is   because 

liberty   of   a   person   is   the   most   important   feature   of   our 

Constitution.     
Article   21
   which   guarantees   protection   of 

life and personal liberty is the most important fundamental 

right  of  the  fundamental  rights  guaranteed   by   the


                                     :2:



Constitution.   
Article 21
 can be said to be the 'heart and 

soul' of the fundamental rights.



      In our opinion, a criminal case should not be decided 

against   the   accused   in   the   absence   of   a   counsel.   We   are 

fortified in the view we are taking by a decision of the US 

Supreme Court in  Powell   Vs.   Alabama,   287 US 45 (1932), 

in which it was observed :-





      "What,   then,   does   a   hearing   include? 
      Historically and in practice, in our own country 
      at least, it has always included the right to the 
      aid of counsel when desired and provided by the 
      party asserting the right.  The right to be heard 
      would   be,   in   many   cases,   of   little   avail   if   it 
      did   not   comprehend   the   right   to   be   heard   by 
      counsel. Even the intelligent and educated layman 
      has small and sometimes no skill in the science 
      of law. If charged with crime, he is incapable, 
      generally, of determining for himself whether the 
      indictment is good or bad. He is unfamiliar with 
      the rules of evidence.   Left without the aid of 
      counsel he may be put on trial without a proper 
      charge, and convicted upon incompetent evidence, 
      or evidence irrelevant to the issue or otherwise 
      inadmissible.   He   lacks   both   the   skill   and 
      knowledge adequately to prepare his defense, even 
      though   he   have   a   perfect   one.   He   requires   the 
      guiding   hand   of   counsel   at   every   step   in   the 
      proceedings   against   him.     Without   it,   though   he 
      be not guilty, he faces the danger of conviction 
      because   he   does   not   know   how   to   establish   his 
      innocence.   If   that   be   true   of   men   of 
      intelligence,   how   much   more   true   is   it   of   the 
      ignorant   and   illiterate,   or   those   of   feeble 
      intellect. If in any case, civil or criminal, a 
      State or federal court were arbitrarily to refuse 
      to   hear   a   party   by   counsel,   employed   by   and 
      appearing   for   him,   it   reasonably   may   not   be 
      doubted that such a refusal would be a denial of 
      a hearing, and, therefore, of due process in the 
      constitutional sense".



                                     :3:


 
The  above  decision  of  the  US  Supreme  Court  was  cited 

with   approval   by   this   Court   in  
A.S.   Mohammed   Rafi    Vs. 

State   of   Tamil   Nadu   &   Ors.
,     AIR   2011   Supreme   Court   308, 

vide para 24.




 
A similar view which we are taking here was also taken 

by   this   Court   in  
Man   Singh   &   Anr.  Vs.  State   of   Madhya 

Pradesh
  (2008) 9 SCC 542, and in  Bapu Limbaji Kamble   Vs. 

State of Maharashtra, (2005) 11 SC 412.




      In this connection we may also refer to 
Articles 21
 and 


22(1)
   of   the   Constitution.     
Articles   21
   and   
Articles   22(1)
 

are as under :





      "
Article   21.
     Protection   of   life   and   personal 
      liberty.   -   No   person   shall   be   deprived   of   his 
      life   or   personal   liberty   except   according   to 
      procedure established by law".



 
Article   22(1).
     Protection   against   arrest   and 
      detention in certain cases. - (1)  No person who 
      is arrested shall be detained in custody without 
      being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds 
      for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right 
      to   consult,   and   to   be   defended   by,   a   legal 
      practitioner of his choice."





In  
Maneka Gandhi  vs.  Union of India
  AIR 1978 SC 597, 

it has been held by a Constitution Bench of this Court that 

the procedure for depriving a person of his life or liberty 

should be fair, reasonable and just. We are of the  opinion


                                     :4: 



that it is not fair or just that a criminal case should be 

decided against an accused in the absence of a counsel.  It 

is   only   a   lawyer   who   is   conversant   with   law   who   can 

properly defend an accused in a criminal case.   Hence, in 

our   opinion,   if   a   criminal   case   (whether   a   trial   or 

appeal/revision)   is   decided   against   an   accused   in   the 

absence of a counsel, there will be violation of 
Article 21
 

of the Constitution.






      The   right   to   appear   through   counsel   has   existed   in 

England   for   over   three   centuries.     In   ancient   Rome   there 

were  great  lawyers  e,g,  Cicero,  Scaevola,      Crassus,  etc. 

who   defended   the   accused.     In   fact   the   higher   the   human 

race   has   progressed   in   civilization,   the   clearer   and 

stronger  has  that  right  appeared,  and  the  more  firmly  has 

it   been   held   and   asserted.     Even   in   the   Nuremberg   trials 

the Nazi war criminals, responsible for killing millions of 

persons, were yet provided counsel.   Therefore when we say 

that   the   accused   should   be   provided   counsel   we   are   not 

bringing   into   existence   a   new   principle   but   simply 

recognizing what already existed and which civilized people 

have long enjoyed. 





                                    :5:


     Apart from the above, we agree with the eminent jurist 

Seervai who has said in his "Constitutional Law of India', 

Third Edition, Vol. I, Pg. 857:-





 
"The right to be defended by counsel   does 

     not appear to have been stressed, and was clearly 

     not   considered   in   any   detail   in   
Ajaib   Singh
's 

     case (1953) SCR 254.   But the right of a person 

     accused   of   an   offence,   or   against   whom   any 

     proceedings   were   taken   under   the   
Cr.P.C
.   is   a 

     valuable   right   which   was   recognized   by   
Section 

     340
 Cr.P.C.  
Article 22 (1)
 on its language makes 

     that   right   a   constitutional   right,   and   unless 

     there   are   compelling   reasons,   
Article   22   (1)
 

     ought   not   to   be   cut   down   by   judicial 

     construction........ It is submitted that 
Article 

     22   (1)
   makes   the   statutory   right   under   
Section 

     340
 Cr.P.C.  a Constitutional right in respect of 

     criminal or quasi-criminal proceedings."




     We   are   fully   in   agreement   with   Mr.   Seervai   regarding 

his   above   observations.     The   Founding   Fathers   of   our 

Constitution  were themselves freedom fighters who had seen 


                                   :6:



civil liberties of our people trampled under foreign rule, 

and   who   had   themselves   been   incarcerated   for   long   period 

under   the   formula  `Na   vakeel,   na   daleel,   na   appeal'  (No 

lawyer, no hearing, no appeal).   Many of them were lawyers 

by   profession,   and   knew   the   importance   of   counsel, 

particularly   in   criminal   cases.     It   was   for   this   reason 

that they provided for assistance by counsel under 
Article 

22   (1)
,   and   that   provision   must   be   given   the   widest 

construction   to   effectuate   the   intention   of   the   Founding 

Fathers.





     In  this   connection,  we   may  also   refer  to   the  ringing 

speech   of    Rt.   Hon.   Srinivasa   Sastri,   speaking   in   the 

Imperial   Legislative   Council,   at   the   introduction   of   the 

Rowlatt   Bill,   Feb   7,   1919   (the   Rowlatt   Act   prohibited 

counsels   to   appear   for   the   accused   in   cases   under   the 

Act):-





     "When   Government   undertakes   a   repressive   policy, 
     the innocent are not safe. Men like me would not 
     be   considered   innocent.   The   innocent   then   is   he 
     who forswears politics, who takes no part in the 
     public   movements   of   the   times,   who   retires   into 
     his   house,   mumbles   his   prayers,   pays   his   taxes, 
     and   salaams   all   the   government   officials   all 
     round.   The   man   who   interferes   in   politics,   the 
     man   who   goes   about   collecting   money   for   any 
     public  purpose,  the  man who addresses a public 

                                   :7:



     meeting,   then   becomes   a   suspect.   I   am   always   on 
     the   borderland   and   I,   therefore,   for   personal 
     reasons,   if   for   nothing   else,   undertake   to   say 
     that   the   possession,   in   the   hands   of   the 
     Executive, of powers of this drastic nature will 
     not hurt only the wicked. It will hurt the good 
     as   well   as   the   bad,   and   there   will   be   such   a 
     lowering   of   public   spirit,   there   will   be   such   a 
     lowering   of   the   political   tone   in   the   country, 
     that all your talk of responsible government will 
     be mere mockery...



     "Much   better   that   a   few   rascals   should   walk 
     abroad than that the honest man should be obliged 
     for fear of the law of the land to remain shut up 
     in   his   house,   to   refrain   from   the   activities 
     which   it   is   in   his   nature   to   indulge   in,   to 
     abstain from all political and public work merely 
     because there is a dreadful law in the land."



     In  Gideon  vs           Wainwright,   372   US   335   (1963) 

Mr.  Justice  Hugo  Black  of  the  US  Supreme  Court  delivering 

the unanimous judgment of the Court observed:- 





     "Lawyers   in   criminal   courts   are   necessities,   not 
luxuries"



     In  Brewer  vs  William,   430   US   387   (1977)   Mr     Justice 

Stewart   delivering   the   opinion   of   the   US   Supreme   Court 

observed;-





             "The   pressures   on   state   executive   and 
     judicial officers charged with the administration 
     of   the   criminal   law   are   great.     But   it   is 
     precisely   the   predictability   of   those   pressures 
     that   makes   imperative   a   resolute   loyalty   to   the 
     guarantees   that   the   Constitution   extends   to   us 
     all. "                               :8:



      For   the   reasons   stated   above,   we   allow   this   Appeal, 

set   aside   the   impugned   judgment   of   the   High   Court   and 

remand   the   matter   to   the   High   Court   for   a   fresh   decision 

after   hearing   Mr.   Sinha,   the   new   learned   counsel   for   the 

appellant in the High Court, or any other counsel which has 

been engaged by the appellant, or in the absence of these, 

an  amicus curiae being a lawyer practising on the criminal 

side.



      The   case   shall   be   heard   by   a   Bench   of   Judges   other 

than those who passed the impugned judgment.


      The   Order   dated   24.01.2011   passed   by   this   Court 

granting   bail   to   the   appellant   shall   continue   till   the 

appeal is decided by the High Court.





      We   reiterate   that   in   the   absence   of   a   counsel,   for 

whatever reasons, the case should not be decided forthwith 

against   the   accused   but   in   such   a   situation   the   Court 

should appoint a counsel who is practising on the criminal 

side   as  amicus   curiae  and   decide   the   case   after   fixing 

another date and hearing him.



      If on the next date of hearing the counsel, who ought 

to have appeared on the previous date but did not appear, 

now   appears,   but   cannot   show   sufficient   cause   for   his 

non-appearance  on  the  earlier date,  then  he   will  be


                                           :9:



     precluded from appearing and arguing the case on behalf of 

     the accused.   But, in such a situation, it is open to the 

     accused  to  either engage another counsel or the Court may 

     proceed   with   the   hearing   of   the   case   by   the   counsel 

     appointed as amicus curiae. 





                                               ......................J.
                                               (MARKANDEY KATJU)




                                               .......................J.
                                               (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)
     NEW DELHI;

     FEBRUARY 24, 2011.

                                       :10: