Jugal Kishore Khetawat vs State Of West Bengal on 25 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
11
, Cited by 
1
]










Top AI Tags


special-leave-appeal-by-supreme-court


causing-hurt-while-committing-robbery


protection-of-life-and-liberty


murder


criminal-conspiracy






User Queries


article 136


abatement of appeal


leave to appeal


near relative


Petition Under Article 136


abatment


grant of leave 


leave granted










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Jugal Kishore Khetawat vs State Of West Bengal on 25 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 1358, 2011 (11) SCC 502, 2011 AIR SCW 1907, (2011) 2 RECCRIR 847, (2011) 1 CRILR(RAJ) 443, 2011 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 443, 2011 (3) SCC(CRI) 387, 2011 (3) SCALE 414, 2011 ALL MR(CRI) 1320, 2011 (3) KCCR 285 SN, 2011 (3) CGLJ 27 SN, (2011) 2 CURCRIR 378, (2011) 3 SCALE 414, (2011) 3 GUJ LH 135, (2011) 3 MAD LJ(CRI) 765, (2011) 49 OCR 133, 2011 CRILR(SC&MP) 443, (2010) 4 CRIMES 35


Bench: 
Surinder Singh Nijjar
, 
B. Sudershan Reddy


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 


                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 


                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 168 OF 2007 





JUGAL KISHORE KHETAWAT                                       APPELLANT



                                      VERSUS



STATE OF WEST BENGAL

        RESPONDENT

                                       WITH 

                          (Crl. A. No. 1399 of 2007)





                                     ORDER 



        The sole appellant in this appeal Smt. Bimala Devi Khetawat 


has   been   convicted   for   the   offence   punishable   under   
Section 


120B
/
302
 IPC on the allegation that she was a party to a conspiracy 


to   commit   murder   of   two   of   her   neighbours   and   sentenced   life 


imprisonment   by   the   learned   Additional   Sessions   Judge,   6th  Court, 


Alipore.   The  Criminal Appeal preferred by her in the High Court of 


Calcutta was dismissed.  She preferred a special leave petition under 



Article 136
 of the Constitution of India against the said judgment and 


order   dated   25.9.2006   passed   by   the   High   Court   at   Calcutta.     This 


Court vide its order dated 5.2.2007 granted leave. 



        That   on   16.6.2008   the   appellant   died.     The   husband   of   the 


deceased   appellant   Jugal   Kishore   Khetawat   filed   an   application 


seeking   leave   of   the   court   to   continue   the   appeal.   In     the   said 


application it is averred that "even though the appellant has died, the 


name of the appellant has not been cleared of the charges and of the 


conviction. It is further submitted that it is in the interest of justice 


that   the   stigma   attached   to   the   name   of   the   appellant   is   cleared 


which is also adversely affecting the near family and relatives of the 


appellant.   It is under these circumstances, the applicant who is the 


husband  of the deceased appellant has filed the present application 


seeking leave to continue with the appeal."





        The Registrar of this Court vide order dated 7.8.2008  passed 


the following order: 





                     "Crl.   M.P.   No.   11889/2009   is   allowed. 



            Amend   the   cause   title   accordingly.   Thereafter, 

            office to process for listing."



        A   short   question   that   arises   for     our   consideration   in   this 


appeal is whether the husband of the deceased appellant is entitled 


to   continue   the   appeal   and,   if   so,   whether   leave   to   continue   the 


appeal could have been granted by the Registrar of this Court. 



 
Section 394
 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which is 


relevant for our present purpose reads as under: 



            "394.  Abatement   of   appeals.-  (1)   Every   appeal 

            under 
Section 377
 or 
section 378
 shall finally abate on 

            the death of the accused. 




            (2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an 

            appeal from a sentence of fine) shall finally abate on 

            the death of the appellant: 





            Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction 

            and   sentence   of   death   or   of   imprisonment,   and   the 

            appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any 

            of   his   near   relatives   may,   within   thirty   days   of   the 

            death of the appellant apply to the Appellate Court for 

            leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, 

            the appeal shall not abate. 




            Explanation._ In this section, "near relative" means a 

            parent, spouse, lineal descendant, brother or sister."





         A plain reading of sub-section (2) of 
Section 394
 suggests that 


every appeal preferred under Chapter XXIX  except an appeal from a 


sentence   of   fine   shall   finally   abate   on   the   death   of   the   appellant. 


However,   a   provision   is   made   that   "where   the   appeal   is   against   a 


conviction   and   sentence   of   death   or   of   imprisonment,   and   the 


appellant   dies   during   the   pendency   of   the   appeal,   any   of   his   near 


relatives may, within thirty days of the death of the appellant, apply 


to the Appellate Court for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is 


granted, the appeal shall not abate; `near relative' means a parent, 


spouse, lineal descendant, brother or sister.



         Such   a   proviso   has   been   added   in   the   following 


circumstances: 





     An   amendment   to   
Section   431
   was   suggested   in   the   Bill 


introduced   in   the   Parliament   by   a   private   Member,   Shri   K.V. 


Raghunatha   Reddy.   The   main   object   of   the   amendment   was   to 


provide   a   machinery   whereby   the   children   or   the   members   of   the 


family   of   a   convicted   person   who   dies   during   the   appeal   could 


challenge   the   conviction   and   get   rid   of   the   odium   attaching   to   the 


family as a result of the conviction. The Law Commission of India by 


its Forty-First Report (September 1969, Vol. I, pp. 279-81) found the 


proposed amendment "eminently sound" and recommended that the 


amendment be made with certain modifications. Accordingly 
Section 


394
   of   the   Code   of   Criminal   Procedure,   1973   has   made   the   said 


proviso. 





      It   is   thus   clear   that   every   appeal   under   Chapter   XXIX   of   the 


Code except an appeal from a sentence of fine shall finally abate on 


the   death   of   the   appellant   but   a   near   relative   of   the   deceased 


appellant may, within thirty days of the death of the appellant, apply 


to the Appellate Court for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is 


granted, the appeal shall not abate.





      It is thus clear that no near relative of the  deceased appellant is 


automatically entitled to come on record as a legal representative of 


the   deceased   appellant   and   continue   the   appeal   unless     leave   is 


granted   by   the   appellate   court   to   continue   the   appeal.     Once   the 


leave is granted by the appellate court, the appeal shall not abate. 




 
It   is   true   the   present   appeal   is   not   the   one   preferred   under 


Chapter XXIX but by way of Special Leave Petition under 
Article 136
 


of the Constitution of India. While dealing with the nature, width and 


amplitude   of   jurisdiction   of   this   Court   under   
Article   136
   of   the 


Constitution   this   Court   in   
P.S.R.   Sadhanantham   vs.   Arunachalam
 


[ (1980) 3 SCC 141] observed:






            "In express terms, 
Article 136
 does not confer a right 

            of   appeal   on   a   party   as   such   but   it   confers   a   wide 

            discretionary power on the Supreme Court to interfere 

            in   suitable   cases.   It   is   residuary   power   and   is 

            extraordinary   in   its   amplitude.     But   the   Constitution 

            makers intended in the very terms of 
Article 136
 that 

            it shall be exercised by the highest judges of the land 

            with   scrupulous   adherence   to   judicial   principles   well 

            established   by   precedents   in   our   jurisprudence. 

            
Article  136
 has a composite structure of power-cum-

            procedure inasmuch as there is an in-built prescription 

            of exercise of judicial discretion and mode of hearing. 

            It is fair to assume that while considering the petition 

            under   
Article   136
   the   court   will   pay   attention   to   the 

            question of liberty, the person who seeks such leave 

            from   the   court,   his   motive   and   his   locus   standi   and 

            the weighty factors which persuade the court to grant 

            special   leave.     When   this   conspectus   of   processual 

            circumstances   and   criteria   play   upon   the   jurisdiction 

            of   the   court   under   
Article   136
,   it   is   reasonable   to 

            conclude   that   the   desideratum   of   fair   procedure 

            implied in 
Article 21
 is adequately answered. Though 

            parties   promiscuously   `provoke'   this   jurisdiction,   the 

            court   parsimoniously   invokes   the   power.   Moreover, 

            the   court   may   not,   save   in   special   situations,   grant 


              leave   to   one   who   is   not   eo   nomine   a   party   on   the 

              record.   Thus,   procedural   limitations   exist   and   are 

              governed by well-worn rules of guidance.





      This Court in exercise of its powers under 
Article 136
 may grant 


leave in appropriate cases on an application by a near relative of the 


deceased   appellant;   and   if   leave   is   granted,   the   appeal   shall   not 


abate. 





 
In   our   opinion,   the   principle   embodied   in   
Section   394
   of   the 


Code   can   be   pressed   into   service   in   appeals   before   this   Court   so 


preferred under 
Article 136
 of the Constitution of India. This Court in 



Hari   Prasad   Chhapolia   vs.   Union   of   India
   [   (2008)   7   SCC   690] 


observed:






              "In view of what has been stated by this Court in the 

              aforenoted   cases   the   principles   embodied   in   
Section 

              394
 of the Code can be pressed into service in appeals 

              before this Court.  It is true that the period of 30 days 

              has been statutorily fixed for making an application by 

              the   legal   heirs.   In   the   instant   case,   the   application 

              was filed nearly after one year.   We need not go into 

              the   question   as   to   whether   there   is   scope   for 

              condonation of delay as no acceptable explanation has 

              been offered for the delayed presentation."



           In   the   present   appeal   the   spouse   of   the   deceased   appellant 


filed   application   seeking   leave   of   the   court   to   continue   the   appeal. 


The Registrar of this Court allowed the application and directed  the 


cause   title   to   be   amended   accordingly.     No   leave   to   continue   the 


appeal   has   been   granted   by   the   Registrar.     The   Registrar   of   this 


Court   in   our   considered   opinion   could   not   have   granted   leave   to 


continue   the   appeal.     Order   VI   of   the   Supreme   Court   Rules,   1966 


confers the powers of the Court in relation to the matters mentioned 


therein to be exercised by the Registrar which includes application for 


substitution,   except   where   the   substitution   would   involve   setting 


aside an abatement. The application filed in the instant case by the 


spouse of the deceased appellant is not one for substitution but an 


application   seeking     the   leave   of   the   court   to   continue   the   appeal. 


The Registrar of this Court is not conferred with any such power to 


grant leave to continue the appeal.  That power can be exercised only 


by the Court and by none else. 





        For   the   aforesaid   reasons,   we   are   of   the   opinion   that:   (a)  


        where   the   appeal   is   against   a   conviction   and   sentence   of 


death   or   of   imprisonment,   and   the   appellant   dies   during   the 


pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may, within thirty 


days of the death of the appellant, apply to the Appellate Court for 


leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, the appeal shall 


not abate;





(b)     the power to grant leave to continue the appeal is conferred 


on the court and not on the Registrar under Order VI of the Supreme 


Court Rules, 1966. 





        For the aforesaid reasons, the order passed by the Registrar 


on   7.8.2008   is   set   aside.     The   Criminal   Miscellaneous   Petition   No. 


11889   of   2009   filed   by   the   husband   of   the   deceased   appellant   is 


allowed and leave is accordingly granted to continue the appeal


        List the appeal for hearing. 





                                                     ..............................................J

                                                      (B. SUDERSHAN REDDY)





                                                     ..............................................J

                                                   (SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR)

New Delhi;



February 25, 2011