Electronics Corp.Of India Limited vs Union Of India & Ors on 17 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
4
, Cited by 
74
]










Top AI Tags


duty-of-excise-charged-on-goods


companies-law


central-excise






User Queries


ONGC v. CCE


ONGC


recall of witness: judgments


 adjudicating authority










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Electronics Corp.Of India Limited vs Union Of India & Ors on 17 February, 2011


Bench: 
S.H. Kapadia
, 
Mukundakam Sharma
, 
K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan
, 
Swatanter Kumar
, 
Anil R. Dave


                                                                                              1


                                                            REPORTABLE



                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.1883  OF 2011

            (arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 2538 of 2009)


Electronics Corporation of India Ltd.                       ... 

Appellant(s)


                                   versus


Union of India & Ors.                                      ...Respondent(s)


                                    with

                    Civil Appeal No. 1903 of 2008




                                O R D E R



S.H. KAPADIA, CJI




          Leave granted.



2.        Electronics   Corporation   of   India   Ltd.   ("assessee"   for 


short)   is   a   Central   Government   Public   Sector   Undertaking 


("PSU").  It  is registered as a Government Company under the 



Companies Act, 1956
. It is under the control of Department of 


Atomic   Energy,   Government   of   India.   A   dispute   had   been 


raised   by   the   Central   Government   (Ministry   of   Finance)   by 


issuing   show   cause   notices   to   the   assessee   alleging   that   the 


Corporation   was   not   entitled   to   avail/utilize   Modvat/Cenvat 


Credit   in   respect   of   inputs   whose   values   stood   written   off. 



Accordingly it was proposed in the show cause notices that the 



                                                                                     2



credit   taken   on   inputs   was   liable   to   be   reversed.   Thus,   the 


short point which arose for determination in the present case 


was whether the Central Government was right in insisting on 


reversal   of   credit   taken   by   the   assessee   on   inputs   whose 


values stood written off.



3.        The   adjudicating   authority   held   that   there   was   no 


substance in the contention of the assessee that the write off 


was made in terms of AS-2. The case of the assessee before the 


Commissioner   of   Central   Excise   (adjudicating   authority)   was 


that it was a financial requirement as prescribed in AS-2; that 


an   inventory   more   than   three   years   old   had   to   be   written 


off/derated in value; that such derating in value  did not mean 


that the inputs were unfunctionable; that the inputs were still 


lying   in   the   factory   and   they   were   useful   for   production   and 


therefore they were entitled to Modvat/Cenvat credit. As stated 


above,   this   argument   was   rejected   by   the   adjudicating 


authority   and   the   demand   against   the   assessee   stood 


confirmed. Against the order of the adjudicating authority, the 


assessee   decided   to   challenge   the   same   by   filing   an   appeal 


before   CESTAT.   Accordingly,   the   assessee   applied   before   the 


Committee   on   Disputes   (CoD).   However,   the   CoD   vide   its 


decision dated 2.11.2006 refused to grant clearance though in 



                                                                                       3



an  identical  case the CoD granted   clearance  to  Bharat  Heavy 


Electricals Ltd. ("BHEL"). Accordingly, the assessee herein filed 


Writ Petition No. 26573 of   2008 in the Andhra Pradesh High 


Court. By the impugned decision, the writ petition filed by the 


assessee   stood   dismissed.   Against   the   order   of   the   Andhra 


Pradesh High Court the assessee has moved this Court by way 


of a special leave petition.



4.        In   a   conjunct   matter,   Civil   Appeal   No.   1903   of   2008, 


the facts were as follows.



          Bharat   Petroleum   Corporation   Ltd.   ("assessee"   for 


short)   cleared   the   goods   for   sale   at   the   outlets   owned   and 


operated   by   themselves   known   as   Company   Owned   and 


Company Operated Outlets. The assessee cleared the goods for 


sale   at   such   outlets   by   determining   the   value   of   the   goods 


cleared   during   the   period   February,   2000   to   November,  2001 


on the basis of the price at which such goods were sold from 


their   warehouses   to   independent   dealers,   instead   of 


determining   it   on   the   basis   of   the   normal   price   and   normal 


transaction   value   as   per   
Section   4(4)(b)(iii)
   of   Central   Excise 


Act,   1944   ("1944   Act"   for   short)   read   with   Rule   7   of   Central 


Excise   Valuation   (Determination   of   Price   of   Excisable   Goods) 



                                                                                         4



Rules, 2000. In short, the price adopted by the assessee which 


is a PSU in terms of Administered Pricing Mechanism ("APM") 


formulated   by   Government   of   India   stood   rejected.   The 


Tribunal came to the conclusion that the APM adopted by the 


assessee   was   in   terms   of   the   price   fixed   by   the   Ministry   of 


Petroleum   and   Natural   Gas;   that   it   was   not   possible   for   the 


assessee   to   adopt   the   price   in   terms   of   
Section   4(1)(a)
   of   the 


1944   Act;   and   that   it   was   not   possible   to   arrive   at   the 


transaction value in terms of the said section. Accordingly, the 


Tribunal allowed the appeal of the assessee. Aggrieved by the 


decision of the Tribunal, CCE has come to this Court by way of 


Civil   Appeal   No.   1903   of   2008   in   which   the   assessee   has 


preferred   I.A.   No.   4   of   2009   requesting   the   Court   to   dismiss 


the   above   Civil   Appeal   No.   1903   of   2008   filed   by   the 


Department on the ground that CoD has declined permission 


to the Department to pursue the said appeal.



5.        The above two instances are given only to highlight the 


fact   that   the   mechanism   set   up   by   this   Court   in   its   Orders 


reported in (i) 1995 Suppl.(4) SCC 541 (
ONGC  v.  CCE
) dated 


11.10.1991;     (ii)   2004   (6)   SCC   437   (
ONGC     v.     CCE
)   dated 


7.1.1994;   and   (iii)   2007   (7)   SCC   39   (ONGC     v.     City   & 


Industrial   Development   Corpn.)   dated   20.7.2007   needs   to   be 



                                                                                     5



revisited.




6.         Learned   Attorney   General   has   submitted   that   the 


above   Orders   have   outlived   their   utility   and   in   view   of   the 


changed   scenario,   as   indicated   hereinafter,   the   aforestated 


Orders are required to be recalled.                We   find   merit   in   the 


submission made by the Attorney General of India on behalf of 


the   Union   of   India   for   the   following   reasons.   By   Order   dated 


11.9.1991, reported in       1992 Supp (2) SCC 432 (
ONGC and 


Anr.        v.   CCE
),   this   Court   noted   that   "Public   Sector 


Undertakings   of   Central   Government   and   the   Union   of   India 


should not fight their litigations in Court".   Consequently, the 


Cabinet   Secretary,   Government   of   India   was   "called   upon   to 


handle the matter personally".




7.         This   was   followed   by   the   order   dated   11.10.1991   in 



ONGC-II
   case        (supra)   where   this   Court   directed   the 


Government   of   India   "to   set   up   a   Committee   consisting   of 


representatives from the Ministry of Industry, Bureau of Public 


Enterprises and Ministry of Law, to monitor disputes between 


Ministry   and   Ministry   of   Government   of   India,   Ministry   and 


public   sector   undertakings   of   the   Government   of   India   and 


public sector undertakings between themselves, to ensure that 



                                                                                    6



no   litigation   comes   to   Court   or   to   a   Tribunal   without   the 


matter   having   been   first   examined   by   the   Committee   and   its 


clearance for litigation".




8.        Thereafter,   in  
ONGC-III
   case  (supra),   this   Court 


directed that in the absence of clearance from the "Committee 


of   Secretaries"   (CoS),   any   legal   proceeding   will   not   be 


proceeded with.  This was subject to the rider that appeals and 


petitions   filed   without   such   clearance   could   be   filed   to   save 


limitation.     It  was,   however,   directed   that   the   needful   should 


be   done   within   one  month  from   such  filing,  failing   which   the 


matter would not be proceeded with.
 
By another order dated 



20.7.2007  (
ONGC-IVth
 case)  this Court extended the concept 


of Dispute Resolution by High-Powered Committee to amicably 


resolve the disputes involving the State Governments and their 


Instrumentalities.




9.        The idea behind setting up of this Committee, initially, 


called   a   "High-Powered   Committee"   (HPC),   later   on   called   as 


"Committee   of   Secretaries"   (CoS)   and   finally   termed   as 


"Committee  on  Disputes"   (CoD)   was  to  ensure   that  resources 


of   the   State   are   not   frittered   away   in  inter   se  litigations 


between entities of the State, which could be best resolved, by 



                                                                                         7



an empowered CoD.  The machinery contemplated was only to 


ensure   that   no   litigation   comes   to   Court   without   the   parties 


having   had   an   opportunity   of   conciliation   before   an   in-house 


committee. [see : para 3 of the order dated 7.1.1994   (supra)] 


Whilst   the   principle   and   the   object   behind   the   aforestated 


Orders   is   unexceptionable   and   laudatory,   experience   has 


shown that despite best efforts of the CoD, the mechanism has 


not achieved the results for which it was constituted and has 


in   fact  led  to   delays   in  litigation.     We   have   already   given   two 


examples   hereinabove.     They   indicate   that   on   same   set   of 


facts, clearance is given in one case and refused in the other. 



This   has   led   a   PSU   to   institute   a   SLP   in   this   Court   on   the 


ground   of   discrimination.     We   need   not   multiply   such 


illustrations.       The   mechanism   was   set   up   with   a   laudatory 


object.     However,   the   mechanism   has   led   to   delay   in   filing   of 


civil   appeals   causing   loss   of   revenue.     For   example,   in   many 


cases   of   exemptions,   the   Industry   Department   gives 


exemption,   while   the   same   is   denied   by   the   Revenue 


Department.   Similarly, with the enactment of regulatory laws 


in   several   cases   there   could   be   overlapping   of   jurisdictions 


between,   let   us   say,   SEBI   and   insurance   regulators.     Civil 


appeals lie to this Court.  Stakes in such cases are huge.  One 


cannot   possibly   expect   timely   clearance   by   CoD.     In   such 



                                                                                    8



cases,   grant   of   clearance   to   one   and   not   to   the   other   may 


result   in   generation   of   more   and   more   litigation.     The 


mechanism   has   outlived   its   utility.     In   the   changed   scenario 


indicated above, we are of the view that time has come under 


the above circumstances to recall the directions of this Court 



in  its  various  Orders  reported   as  (i)  1995  Supp  (4)  SCC  541 



dated 11.10.1991,  (ii)  (2004) 6  SCC 437  dated  7.1.1994  and 




(iii) (2007) 7 SCC 39 dated 20.7.2007.



10.       In   the   circumstances,   we   hereby   recall   the   following 


Orders reported in :  



(i)  1995 Supp (4) SCC 541 dated 11.10.1991



(ii) (2004) 6 SCC 437 dated 7.1.1994 



(iii) (2007) 7 SCC 39 dated 20.7.2007




11.       For the aforestated reasons, I.A. No. 4 filed by the assessee 


in Civil Appeal No. 1903/2008 is dismissed.



                                                 .................................CJI

                                                  (S. H. Kapadia)





                                                 ...................................J.

                                                  (Mukundakam Sharma)



                                                               9



                               ...................................J.

                                          (K.S.   Panicker 

Radhakrishnan)





                               ...................................J.

                                  (Swatanter Kumar)





                               ...................................J.

                                  (Anil R. Dave)

New Delhi; 



February 17, 2011