Ravinder Raj vs M/S. Competent Motors Co. Pvt. ... on 10 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
1
, Cited by 
0
]










Top AI Tags


sale-of-goods






User Queries


 special leave petition


maruti udyog


delivery   filter:  sales of goods act 1930 cases


 maruti udyog limited 


vehicle          filter:          deficiency in service


maruti










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Ravinder Raj vs M/S. Competent Motors Co. Pvt. ... on 10 February, 2011


Bench: 
Cyriac Joseph
, 
Altamas Kabir


                                                      1




                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(Civil) No(s).10364/2006

 

          RAVINDER RAJ                                      Petitioner(s)

                 VERSUS

          M/S. COMPETENT MOTORS CO. PVT. LTD.&ANR.          Respondent(s)

       WITH SLP(C) NO. 9739-9740 of 2009

                                           O R D E R



                        Two  Special Leave  Petitions, being  SLP(C) 

             Nos.   10364   of   2006   and   9739-9740   of   2009,   have 

             been   filed   against   the   judgment   and   order   dated 

             19th  July,   2005,   passed   by   the   National   Consumer 

             Disputes   Redressal   Commission   at   New   Delhi  in 

             Revision   Petition   No.1485   of   2005   and   the   order 

             dated   7th  August,   2008   passed   by   the   said 

             Commission   in   Revision   Petition   No.2974   of   2005 

             filed   by   the   respondent   No.1,   Maruti   Udyog 

             Limited   and   also   M.A.No.599   of   2006   in   Revision 

             Petition   1533   of   2005   filed   by   the   respondent 

             No.2,  namely,  Competent Motors Co.Pvt.Ltd., the 

             dealer.



             2.      The   petitioner,   Mr.   Ravinder   Raj,   who   is 

             appearing   in   person,   applied   to   Maruti   Udyog 

             Ltd.in 1985-1986 for booking a Maruti Car-800 and 



                               2




deposited a sum of Rs.10,000/- as initial/advance 

booking   payment.       On   15th  July,   1988,   the 

respondent No.2 informed the petitioner by letter 

of   even     date   that   his   Maruti   Car   Allotment 

No.0802-N-04051   had   matured   for   delivery   and 

requested   the   petitioner   to   make   payment   of   the 

full amount of the  price of the car for delivery 

of   the   vehicle   after   completing   the   necessary 

formalities.     Pursuant to the above letter, the 

petitioner   on   16th  February,   1989,   paid   a   total 

amount of Rs.78,351.05 which covered the price of 

the   vehicle,   insurance   charges   and   other   minor 

charges, including registration charges.     There 

is no denial that the petitioner had opted for a 

cream colour vehicle.



3.      On   1st  March,   1989,   there   was   an   increase 

in the excise duty payable, causing a price hike 

of   about   Rs.6710.61.       On   18th  March,   1989,   the 

petitioner received a letter from the respondent 

No.2   to   deposit   the   excess   amount   payable   as 

excise duty, and, accordingly, the petitioner did 

so under protest on 16th February, 1989.


4.      The official billing in respect of the car 

was done on 5th April, 1989.



5.      The   petitioner   has   contended   that   the 

delay   in   delivery   of   the   vehicle   to   him   by   the 



                               3




respondents was not occasioned by any failure or 

negligence on his part and   the liability to pay 

the   increased   amount   on   account   of   increase   in 

excise duty, was not that of the petitioner, but 

of   the   respondents   concerned.       The   petitioner, 

therefore, applied to the District Consumer Forum 

for a direction upon the respondents to bear the 

increase in excise duty resulting in  increase in 

the   price.       Such   a   prayer   was   rejected   by   the 

District   Consumer   Forum.     The   petitioner   then 

went   to   the   State   Forum   which   allowed   the 

petitioner's   claim.     Against   the   said   order, 

the   respondents   went   before   the   National 

Commission,   which   reversed   the   order   passed   by 

the State Forum.     It is against the said order 

that the petitioner has come to this Court by way 

of this Special Leave Petition.



6.      As   indicated   hereinabove,   the   main   ground 

urged by the petitioner is that since he was not 

responsible for the delay in the delivery of the 

vehicle,   he   should   not   be   made   to   bear   the 

increase   in   the   price,   particularly,   when   from 

the   documents,   as   indicated   by   him,   the   vehicle 

of the   colour chosen by him was available with 

the respondents.     He, therefore, submitted that 

the order of the National Forum was erroneous and 



                               4




was liable to be set aside.



7.      Appearing   for   the   dealer,   M/s.Competent 

Motors   Co.Pvt.Ltd.,   Ms.   Sapna   Sinha,   learned 

advocate   pointed   out   that   even   from   the   receipt 

of   the   amount   paid   by   the   petitioner   on   16th 

February, 1989, it will be clear that the amount 

paid   was   subject   to   the   price   prevailing   on   the 

date   of   the   invoice.       According   to   learned 

counsel,   since   the   bill   was   dated   5th  of   April, 

1989,   it   was   the   petitioner   who   was   required   to 

bear   the   increase   in   price   on   account   of   the 

increase   in   excise   duty.       Furthermore,   she 

reiterated   that   the   colour   which   the   petitioner 

had   wanted   was   not   available   at   that   point   of 

time,   although,   from   the   documents   it   would 

appear   that   the   same   was   available.       According 

to   her,   the   said   documents   only   indicated   that 

these   were   the   colours   in   which   the   cars   were 

being   manufactured   and   did   not   really   indicate 

the   fact   that   such   a   colour   was   available   on   a 

particular date.



8.      According to her, there was no negligence 

on   the   part   of   the   dealer   since   having   received 

intimation   about   the   readiness   of   the   vehicle, 

the respondent No.2 had immediately informed the 

petitioner,   but   unfortunately,   in   the   meantime, 



                                5




the price had risen.     According to the learned 

counsel,   the   respondent   No.2   could   not, 

therefore, be made liable for the increase in the 

price.



9.         Mr.   Dayal,   appearing   for   the   the   Maruti 

Udyog   Limited,   while   adopting   the   submissions 

made by Ms. Sinha, also added that having regard 

to   
Section   64A
   of   the   Sale   of   Goods   Act,   1930, 

the burden of any increase in the price by way of 

additional   taxes   would   have   to   be   borne   by   the 

customer and not by the manufacturer.     He also 

reiterated that since there was no negligence on 

the   part   of   the   manufacturer   in   making   the 

vehicle available to the petitioner and since no 

mala   fide   intention   had   been   proved,   the 

petitioner would have to bear the increase in the 

prices.



10.        Having considered the submissions made, we 

may refer to the letter of 15th  July, 1988, which 

had been written on behalf of the respondent No.2 

to   the   petitioner   indicating   that   the 

petitioner's   allotment   No.   had   matured   for 

delivery.  In the second paragraph of the letter, 

the   respondent   No.2   requested   the   petitioner   to 

complete the modalities for effecting delivery of 

the   car     against   the   allotment   number.     It   was 



                               6




categorically   indicated   that   on   receiving 

payment,   delivery   would   be   effected   in   the 

sequence of priority.   Coupled with the above is 

the proforma invoice dated 15th  July, 1988, where 

it   was   further   indicated   that   the   price 

prevailing   at   the   time   of   billing   would   be 

applicable, despite the fact that the details of 

the price of the vehicle were set out in the said 

invoice.



11.     As   indicated   hereinabove,   even   in   the 

receipt   given   to   the   petitioner   for   payment   of 

the   amount   in   the   proforma   invoice,   it   had   been 

indicated that the prices prevailing on the date 

of billing would apply.



12.     In  this  case,  the  billing  was  done  on  5th 

of April, 1989.   In the absence of any evidence 

of   any   deliberate   intention   on   the   part   of   the 

respondents to delay  delivery of the vehicle, we 

are unable to agree with the petitioner that the 

increase   in   price   has   to   be   borne   by   the 

respondents.       The   petitioner   had   relied   on   two 

decisions of this Court in the case of  Omprakash 

Vs.  Assistant Engineer, Haryana   Agro Industries 

Corpn.   Ltd.,   1994(3)SCC   504   and  Mohinder   Pratap 

Dass  Vs  Modern   Automobiles   and     Anr.  1995(3)SCC 

581, on the same issue.     The said two decisions 



                                     7




     in   our   view   are   not   applicable   to   the   facts   of 

     this   case,   on   account   of   the   fact   that   in   the 

     said two matters patent deficiency in the service 

     had   been   found   by   the   Court   and   it   was   also 

     pointed   out   that   there   was   no   satisfactory 

     explanation   for   the   delay   in   delivery   of   the 

     goods to the consumers, which is not the case as 

     far as this particular matter is concerned.


     13.       Furthermore,   having   regard   to   the 

     provisions   of   
Section   64A(1)(a)
   of   the   Sale   of 

     Goods   Act,   1930,     it   is   the   liability   of   the 

     petitioner to pay the extra price when the excise 

     duty   had   been   enhanced   prior   to   the   delivery   of 

     the vehicle.



     14.       In   such   circumstances,   the  Special   Leave 

     Petition fails and is dismissed.



     15.       Consequently,   in   view   of   this   order,   the 

     other  Special Leave Petition in which     interest 

     on  the amount  claimed has  been prayed  for, does 

     not survive and is also dismissed.


     16.       There   will,   however,   be   no   orders   as   to 

     costs in both the matters. 



                                         ...................J.
                                   (ALTAMAS KABIR)  


                                                                             
                                                                              
                                        



                                  8




                                        
     ...................J.
                                       (CYRIAC JOSEPH)          
                                                      

         New Delhi,
         February 10, 2011.