State Of A.P vs M. Durga Prasad & Ors on 3 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
4
, Cited by 
2
]










Top AI Tags


criminal-conspiracy


forgery


queen


criminal-misconduct






User Queries


fictitious










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


State Of A.P vs M. Durga Prasad & Ors on 3 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 2225, 2011 (15) SCC 365, 2012 AIR SCW 2820, AIR 2012 SC (CRIMINAL) 913, (2012) 2 KCCR 74, (2012) 1 CURCRIR 80


Bench: 
Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
, 
Harjit Singh Bedi


                                                  1



                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA



               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.199 OF 2006


STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH                                    ...APPELLANT

THROUGH CBI


                                  VERSUS


M. DURGA PRASAD & ORS.                             ...RESPONDENTS





                                 O R D E R 



      1.     Altogether   eight   persons   were   put   on   trial   for 



commission   of   the   offences   punishable   under   
Section   120B
 



and   
465
   of  the   Indian   Penal   Code   and   
Section   13(1)(d)(ii)
   read 



with   
Section   13(2)
   of  the   Prevention  of  Corruption   Act.  Special 



Judge for Central Bureau of Investigation cases by its judgment 



dated 19th January, 1998 passed in C.C. No.8 of 1995 acquitted 



accused   No.5,   M.   Laila   Kumari   and   accused   No.7,   A. 



Nageshwara Rao while  holding  other  accused persons guilty of 



the charges levelled against them.  Aggrieved by their conviction 



A1,   G.   Venkateswarlu;            A2,   M.   Durga   Prasad;   A3,   T. 



Hanumantha Rao; A4, M. Chakrapani; A6, K. Pulla Reddy and 



                                      2




A8   P.   Siva   Rama   Prasad   preferred   separate   appeals.     All   the 



appeals were heard together and by a common judgment dated 



14th  August,   2003   the   Andhra   Pradesh   High   Court   acquitted 



them of all the charges.



2.    Aggrieved   by   their   acquittal   the   appellant   has   preferred 



this appeal with the leave of the Court.



3.    According   to   the   prosecution   accused   No.3,   T. 



Hanumantha   Rao-   respondent   No.6   herein   was   a   contractor 



doing   civil   contracts.     He   entered   into   a   conspiracy   with   E. 



Subhash   and   Sheik   Bhasha,   who   later   on   were   declared   as 



approver and examined as PW.1 and PW.2, to cheat the Income 



Tax   Department   and   in   furtherance   of   their   plan   in   collusion 



with   accused   No.1,   G.   Venkateswarlu-respondent   No.5   herein 



who was working as Income Tax Officer, filed bogus Income Tax 



Returns in the names of fictitious persons and claimed Income 



Tax   refunds.     Case   of   the   prosecution   further   is   that   accused 



No.6,   K.   Pulla   Reddy   and   accused   No.8,   P.   Siva   Rama   Prasad 



that   is   respondent   No.3   and   respondent   No.2   herein 



respectively   introduced   accused   No.3,   T.   Hanumantha   Rao   to 



                                        3




open Savings Bank Accounts with Syndicate Bank, Union Bank 



of   India,   State   Bank   of   India   and   Vysya   Bank     and   thus 



facilitated accused No.3 to impersonate these fictitious persons 



to encash the refund orders.  Further  case of the prosecution is 



that   accused   No.2,   M.   Durga   Prasad   and   accused   No.4,   M. 



Chakrapani   -   respondent   No.1   and   respondent   4   herein 



respectively dishonestly helped accused No.3 in getting credited 



the amounts in the names of the different fictitious persons and 



thus   facilitated   him   to   withdraw   the   funds   on   various   dates 



from the Syndicate Bank.   Prosecution has further alleged that 



accused   No.1,   G.   Venkateswarlu   who   was   working   as   Income 



Tax Officer knowing fully well that the Income Tax Returns were 



filed   in   the   names   of   the   fictitious   persons,   dishonestly   and 



fraudulently  processed   and sanctioned   the  refund  to  a tune  of 



Rs.3,92,552/-.



4.    It   is   relevant   here   to   state   that   accused   No.1,   G. 



Venkateswarlu   -  respondent   No.5,   the   Income   Tax   Officer   who 



had   sanctioned   refund   of   the   amount   had   died   during   the 



pendency   of   the   appeal   and   as   such   this   appeal   so   far   as   it 



                                      4




concerns   him   had   abated.     The   trial   court   on   appreciation   of 



evidence convicted the respondents as above but on appeal the 



High Court had acquitted all the accused persons.  



5.    While acquitting accused No.2, M. Durga Prasad the High 



Court   observed   that   only   evidence   against   him   is   that   the 



specimen signature card of one Grunja Venkateswarlu was filed 



by   him   and   excepting   that   there   is   no   other   evidence   to 



establish the complicity of this accused and only on the ground 



that   he   signed   the   introductory   application   he   cannot   be   held 



guilty.



6.    So far as accused No.3, T. Hanumantha Rao is concerned, 



the   trial   court   had   convicted   him   relying   on   the   evidence   of 



PW.1   and   PW.2   who   were   his   accomplice   and   later   on   turned 



approvers.   On   appreciation   of   the   evidence   of   the   aforesaid 



witnesses   the   High   Court   found   that   they   are   not   worthy   of 



reliance and accordingly acquitted him of the charge.



7.    So   far   as   accused   No.4,   M.   Chakrapani   is   concerned   the 



High   Court   observed   that   he   being   a   clerk   in   the   Syndicate 



                                      5




Bank the act done by him in assisting the accounts holders to 



fill   up   the   forms   does   not   lead   to   the   conclusion   that   he 



conspired   to   commit   the   crime   and   accordingly   he   was 



acquitted.



 8.    So far as accused No.6, K. Pulla Reddy and accused No.8, 



P.   Siva   Rama   Reddy   are   concerned,   the   High   Court   observed 



that   according   to   the   prosecution   itself   they   assisted   in   the 



opening   of   the   accounts   in   the   year   1986   whereas   the   offence 



has been committed in the year 1989. Such a remote act in the 



absence   of   any   further   material   brought   by   the   prosecution   it 



led   the   High   Court   to   observe   that   these   two   accused   persons 



cannot   be   held   to   have   conspired   in   commission   of   the   crime 



and accordingly acquitted them.



9.     Mr. A. Mariarputham, learned Senior Counsel appears on 



behalf   of   the   Central   Bureau   of   Investigation,   whereas 



respondents   have   been   represented   by   Mr.   A.T.M. 



Rangaramanujam,   learned   Senior   Counsel,   Mr.   Roy   Abraham, 



Mr.   Chandan   Kumar   and   Mr.   R.   Santhana   Krishnan,   learned 



Counsel.



                                       6


10.    It is well settled that this Court interferes with an order of 



acquittal   only   when   it   comes   to   the   conclusion   that   the   view 



taken  by  the  High  Court   while   acquitting  the  accused is  not  a 



possible   view.     The   reasons   for   acquittal   of   the   respondents 



given   by   the   High   Court   have   been   incorporated   in   the 



preceding paragraphs of this judgment and on perusal thereof it 



cannot be said that the view taken by  the High Court  is not a 



possible   view.     Mr.   Mariarputham,   learned   Senior   Counsel   for 



the   appellant   has   not   been   able   to   point   out   any   reason   from 



which it can be inferred that the view taken by the High Court 



is in any way perverse.  Once it is held so the order of acquittal 



does not need any interference at our hands. 



11.    In the result, we do not find any merit in the appeal and it 



is dismissed accordingly.



                                     ................................................J.

                                           ( HARJIT SINGH BEDI )





                                     ................................................J.

                                        ( CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD )

NEW DELHI,

FEBRUARY 03, 2011.



7