Rama Krushna Roy vs State Of Orissa on 8 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
2
, Cited by 
3
]










Top AI Tags


murder


dowry






User Queries


burn injury 


 KEROSENE










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Rama Krushna Roy vs State Of Orissa on 8 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 3541, 2012 (12) SCC 775, 2012 CRI. L. J. 3351, AIR 2012 SC (CRIMINAL) 1092, AIR 2012 SC (SUPP) 396, (2013) 1 MARRILJ 25, (2012) 4 RECCRIR 940, (2011) 1 ALD(CRL) 885, (2012) 1 CURCRIR 100, (2012) 2 ALD(CRL) 625


Bench: 
Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
, 
Harjit Singh Bedi


                                                           1





                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 188 OF 2006




RAMA KRUSHNA ROY                                          ... APPELLANT


                                             VERSUS




STATE OF ORISSA                               ...RESPONDENT





                                           O R D E R 



1.      Sole appellant, aggrieved by his conviction under 
Section 302
 of the 


Indian   Penal   Code   and   sentence   of   rigorous   imprisonment   for   life,   has 


preferred this appeal by           special leave.  



2.      According to the prosecution, the deceased Santilata was the wife of 


the appellant and married about a year prior to the date of occurrence and 


they were residing in a portion of the house belonging to PW-1, M. Appa 


Rao.     A  day  prior   to  the   lodging   of  the   report  i.e.   30th  of  June,   1994   the 


deceased   along   with   her   husband   i.e.   appellant   herein   came   together, 


went  in  their   house  and  closed   the  door.    After   some  time,  the  landlord, 


PW-1 M. Appa Rao heard screams of the deceased whereupon he went to 


the portion of the house in which the appellant and his wife were residing 



                                                 2





and knocked the door.  According to the prosecution, appellant opened the 


door   and   when   M.Appa   Rao   entered   the   room,   he   found   Santilata   in   a 


severely   burnt   condition   covered   with   a   bed-sheet.     The   appellant   came 


out   of   the   house   and   fled   away.     M.Appa   Rao   brought   Santilata   to   the 


hospital on a trolley-rickshaw and on being asked Santilata disclosed that 


it is the appellant who poured kerosene oil on her and lighted the match-



stick   with   a   view   to   kill   her.     PW-1,   M.Appa   Rao   gave   the   report   of   the 


incident at Jeypur Town Police Station on 30th  of June, 1994 at about 12 


Noon.   On the death of Santilata on 1st  of July, 1994, 
Section 302
 of the 


Indian Penal Code was added.  The deceased was taken to Sub-Divisional 


Hospital,   Jeypore   where   his   statement   was   recorded   by   the   attending 


Assistant Surgeon PW-20, Dr. Bijayananda Padhi.



3.       Police   after   usual   investigation   submitted   charge-sheet   and   the 


appellant was ultimately committed to the Court of Sessions where he was 


charged   for   committing   the   offence   under   
Section   498-A
   and   
302
   of   the 


Indian Penal Code to which he pleaded not guilty.  In order to bring home 


the   charge   the   prosecution   examined   altogether   23   witnesses   besides   a 


large number of documentary evidence including the dying declaration of 


the   deceased   were   exhibited.     Three   witnesses   were   also   examined   on 


behalf   of   the   appellant   which   included   the   appellant   himself   as   DW-2. 



From the trend of the cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses and 


the evidence of the defence witnesses, the plea of the appellant seems to 



                                              3





be that the deceased committed suicide by setting herself on fire.  The trial 


court   relying   on   the   evidence   of   PW-20,   Dr.   Bijayananda   Padhi   who 


recorded   the   dying   declaration   of   the   deceased   (Exhibit   18)   came   to   the 


conclusion that the prosecution has been able to prove its case beyond all 


reasonable doubt and accordingly convicted the appellant as above.   Said 


conviction and sentence has been affirmed in appeal by the High Court.



4.      PW-20,   Dr.   Bijayananda   Padhi   has   stated   in   his   evidence   that   on 


30th  of June, 1994 he was posted as Assistant Surgeon at Sub-Divisional 


Hospital, Jeypore and on that date at 11.15 P.M. Santilata, the deceased 


was   admitted   in   the   hospital   with   extensive   superficial   burn   injuries. 



According   to   him,   the   victim   disclosed   that   her   husband   Rama   Krushna 


Roy poured kerosene on her night dress and set her on fire.  According to 


this   witness   such   an   entry   was   made   in   the   bed   head   ticket   of   the 


deceased.     He   has   further   stated   in   his   evidence   that   the   Investigating 


Officer of the case made requisition for recording dying declaration of the 


deceased   and   being   satisfied   he   recorded   the   dying   declaration   in   the 


presence   of   the   witnesses.     He   has   proved   the   dying   declaration   as 


Exhibit-18 which, according to this witness, was recorded in question and 


answer form.  Regarding the cause of death of the deceased he has further 


stated   in   his   evidence   that   her   husband   brought   kerosene   and   poured 


that on her body and subsequently set her on fire.   The deceased died on 


1st  July,   1994.     The   dying   declaration   (Exhibit   18)   is   in   question   and 



                                               4





answer form relevant portion whereof reads as under : 



                 "Q.     What is your name?


                 A.      Santilata Bihari.


                 Q.      What is your husband Name?


                 A.      Rama Krishna Roy my second husband.


                 Q       Where are you staying?


                 A.      I am staying at market.


                 Q.      What happened today?


A.      There was a quarrel between us for a silly matter regarding an ear-


ring.  He was annoyed as I got the same.  My husband is after my second 

number sister Bidulata that is why the quarrel.



                 Q.      Thereafter what happened?


                 A.      He told me to leave.


                 Q.      Thereafter what happened?


A.      He   poured   kerosene   and   lighted   me   saying   his   line   would   be 

cleared."





5.      Mr. Sibo Sankar Mishra, learned counsel for the appellant submits 


that   save   and   except   the   dying   declaration   of   the   deceased,   there   is   no 


material   to   connect   the   appellant   with   the   crime.     He   submits   that   the 


dying declaration (Exhibit 18) does not contain any endorsement that the 


deceased was in a fit state of mind to give the statement.   In the absence 


of the same, according to the learned counsel, the dying declaration is not 


fit to be relied upon.   We do not find any substance in the submission of 



                                                  5





the learned counsel.  The fact that the deceased died of burn injuries has 


not   been   disputed   by   the   appellant.     According   to   him,   the   deceased 


committed  suicide by setting  herself on fire.    Therefore,  the fact  that the 


deceased   died   of   burn   injuries   cannot   be   ruled   out.     PW-20,   Dr. 


Bijayananda   Padhi   has   clearly   stated   in   his   evidence   that   at   the   time 


when he recorded the dying declaration the deceased was conscious and 


in a fit state of mind.   This doctor is an independent witness and there is 


no reason to disbelieve his evidence.  As such there is no escape from the 


conclusion that the deceased gave the statement while she was conscious 


and   in  a  fit   state   of   mind.     The   dying   declaration   clearly   shows   that  the 


appellant   had   poured   the   kerosene   oil   and   set   his   wife   on   fire   which 


ultimately led to her death.



5.         We   are   of  the   opinion   that  the   trial   court  and   the   High   Court   did 


not   err   in   relying   on   the   evidence   of   PW-20,   Dr.   Bijayananda   Padhi   and 


the   dying   declaration   to   convict   the   appellant.     Appellant   is   on   bail,   his 


bail bonds are cancelled and he is directed to surrender to serve out the 


remainder of the sentence.



      6. In   the   result,   we   do   not   find   any   merit   in   the   appeal   and   it   is 


         dismissed accordingly.



                                       ...............................................J.

                                                 (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)



                                                 6





                                      

                    ................................................J.

                                           (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)

NEW DELHI,

FEBRUARY 8, 2011.