Kokkanda B. Poondacha And Ors vs K.D. Ganapathi And Anr on 22 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
10
, Cited by 
163
]










Top AI Tags


court-superintendence


appeal-high-court < writ-petition-high-court






User Queries


advocate as witness


list of witnesses


Order XVI rule 1


article 227


"order xvi rule 1"


certiorari


supervisory jurisdiction  


good faith


"section 151"


"article 227"


section 151 cpc: laws










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Kokkanda B. Poondacha And Ors vs K.D. Ganapathi And Anr on 22 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 1353, 2011 (12) SCC 600, 2011 AIR SCW 1737, 2011 (2) AIR KANT HCR 574, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 848, (2011) 3 MAD LW 1, (2011) 5 KANT LJ 198, (2011) 4 MAD LJ 512, (2011) 2 ICC 355, (2011) 2 JCR 197 (SC), (2012) 2 ALL RENTCAS 207, (2011) 3 RAJ LW 2321, (2011) 2 RECCIVR 381, (2011) 3 SCALE 42, (2011) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 491, (2011) 3 KCCR 1997, (2011) 3 ALL WC 2925, (2011) 2 CAL HN 208, 2011 (1) KLT SN 150 (SC)


Bench: 
Asok Kumar Ganguly
, 
G.S. Singhvi


                                             1



                                                            REPORTABLE



                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).2015 OF 2011
              (Arising out of SLP(C)No.20821/2010)



KOKKANDA B. POONDACHA AND OTHERS                    Appellant(s)

                 
                              VERSUS



K.D. GANAPATHI AND ANOTHER                            Respondent(s)




                           J U D G M E N T



            Leave granted.



            Whether the respondents (defendant Nos.5 and 6 in 

the suit filed by the appellants), could cite the advocate 

representing the appellants as a witness in the list filed 

under Order XVI Rule 1 (1) and (2) read with 
Section 151
 of 

the Code of Civil Procedure (
CPC
) without giving an iota of 

indication about the purpose of summoning him in future is 

the question which arises for consideration in this appeal 

filed against order dated 24.02.2010 passed by the learned 

Single   Judge   of   the   Karnataka   High   Court   whereby   he   set 

aside the order passed by the trial Court partly dismissing 

the application of the respondents.  





                                   2


            Appellant Nos.1 to 3 and one Parvathy filed suit, 

which   came   to   be   registered   as   O.S.   No.75   of   1996,   for 

partition and separate possession of 1/6th share each in the 

suit property and also for grant of a declaration that sale 

deed dated 10.7.1997 executed by defendant Nos.2 to 4, who 

were,   later   on,   transposed   as   plaintiff   Nos.5   to   7 

(appellant   Nos.4   to   6   herein),   was   not   binding   on   them. 

Defendant   Nos.5   to   7   (including   respondent   Nos.1   and   2 

herein)   filed   written   statement   on   19.2.1998.     Respondent 

Nos.1 and 2 filed additional written statement on 9.8.2002. 

After two years and seven months, they filed an application 

dated 11.3.2005 under Order XVI Rule 1 (1) and (2) read with 


Section 151
 C.P.C. supported by an affidavit of respondent 

No.1   for   permission   to   file   the   list   of   witnesses,   which 

included the name of Shri N. Ravindranath Kamath, Advocate, 

who   was   representing   the   appellants   in   the   suit   from   the 

very beginning.



            The trial Court partly allowed the application of 

respondent Nos.1 and 2 and granted leave to them to file the 

list of witnesses but rejected their prayer for permission 

to   cite   Shri   N.   Ravindranath   Kamath   as   witness   No.1.   The 

reasons assigned by the trial Court for partially declining 

the prayer of respondent Nos.1 and 2 are extracted below:


      "......................While   citing   advocate   of 
      the opposite party as a witness, the defendants 3 



                                   3




     and 4 ought to have given reason for what purpose 
     they are citing him as a witness and examining him 
     in   their   favour.     Once   the   advocate   for   the 
     opposite party is cited as a  witness in the list, 
     the opposite party losses precious service of his 
     advocate.   In that circumstances, the party will 
     suffer.     Under   the   circumstances,   so   as   to   know 
     for   what   purpose   the   defendant   no.2   and   3   are 
     citing and examining the N.R. Kamath advocate for 
     the   plaintiff   in   their   favour   have   to   assign 
     reason.     The   Court   has   to   very   cautious   and 
     careful   while   considering   such   an   aspect   of   the 
     matter   of   examining   and   citing   the   advocate   for 
     the opposite party in their favour.  The Court has 
     to   determine   as   to   whether   the   evidence   of   said 
     advocate is material for the decision of the case 
     or   not?     Unless   defendant   no.2   and   3   assigned 
     reason in the application or in the affidavit as 
     to   why   they   are   citing   the   advocate   for   the 
     opposite party and examining in their favour, the 
     application filed by defendant no.2 and 3 is not 
     maintainable   and   the   said   application   is   not 
     sustainable   under   law.     In   the   above   said 
     Judgment, in para 2, it is clearly held that, "but 
     appellants   then   filed   a   petition   seeking 
     permission to cite the advocate of the respondents 
     as   a   witness".     But   herein   this   case,   the 
     defendant no.2 and 3 are not seeking permission to 
     cite the advocate for the plaintiff as a witness. 
     Defendant   no.2   and   3   not   only   have   to   seek 
     permission of this Court to cite the advocate for 
     the   Plaintiff   as   a   witness,   but   also   he   has   to 
     give   good   reasons   for   what   purpose   he   is   citing 
     him   as   a   witness   and   examining   in   his   favour. 
     Without assigning any reasons and without seeking 
     permission to cite the advocate for the Plaintiff 
     as a witness in the witness list, application to 
     that extent is not tenable and same is liable to 
     be dismissed to that extent."



           The respondents challenged the order of the trial 

Court by filing a petition under 
Articles 226
 and 
227
 of the 

Constitution   insofar   as   their   prayer   for   citing   Shri   N. 

Ravindranath Kamath as a witness was rejected.  The learned 



                                   4




Single Judge allowed the petition and set aside the order of 

the   trial   Court   by   simply   observing   that   reasons   are   not 

required   to   be   assigned   to   justify   the   summoning   of   a 

particular person as a witness.



 
Mrs.   Kiran   Suri,   learned   counsel   for   the 

appellants relied upon the judgment of this Court in 
Shalini 

Shyam Shetty vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil
 (2010) 8 SCC 329 and 

argued  that  the  order  under  challenge  is  liable  to  be  set 

aside   because   the   High   Court   committed   serious   error   by 

interfering   with   the   order   of   the   trial   Court   without 

recording a finding that the said order is vitiated due to 

want   of   jurisdiction   or   any   patent   legal   infirmity   in   the 

exercise of jurisdiction and that refusal of the trial Court 

to   permit   the   respondents   to   cite   Shri   N.   Ravindranath 

Kamath as a witness had prejudiced their cause.
 
She further 

argued   that   the   respondents   are   not   entitled   to   cite   and 

summon as a witness the advocate representing the appellants 

because in the application filed by them, no justification 

was offered for doing so.  In support of this argument, Mrs. 

Suri relied upon the judgment of this Court in 
Mange Ram vs. 

Brij Mohan
 (1983) 4 SCC 36.




 
Shri   S.N.   Bhatt,   learned   counsel   for   the 

respondents   argued   that   even   though   his   clients   had   filed 

application belatedly, the trial Court was not justified in 



                                   5




declining   their   prayer   for   citing   Shri   N.   Ravindranath 

Kamath as a witness merely because he was representing the 

appellants.  Learned counsel submitted that at the stage of 

filing   the   list   of   witnesses,   the   plaintiffs   or   for   that 

reason   the   defendants   are   not   required   to   disclose   the 

nature of the evidence to be given by the particular witness 

or its relevance to the subject matter of the suit etc. and 

the trial Court had grossly erred in not granting leave to 

the respondents to cite Shri N. Ravindranath Kamath as one 

of their witnesses.  Shri Bhatt relied upon the judgment in 


Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai and others
 (2003) 6 SCC 675 

and argued that even after amendment of 
Section 115
, C.P.C., 

the High Court can, in exercise of supervisory power under 


Article 227
, correct the error of jurisdiction committed by 

the Subordinate Court.




            We have considered the respective submissions.  We 

shall   first   consider   the   question   whether   the   High   Court 

could   interfere   with   the   order   of   the   trial   Court   without 

considering the question whether the said order was vitiated 

due to want of jurisdiction or the trial Court had exceeded 

its   jurisdiction   in   deciding   the   application   of   the 

respondents   and   the   order   passed   by   it   has   resulted   in 

failure  of  justice.    
In  
Surya  Dev  Rai
's  case  (supra),  the 

two   Judge   Bench,   after   detailed   analysis   of   the   various 



                                   6




precedents   on   the   scope   of   the   High   Court's   powers   under 


Articles  226
  and  
227
  of  the  Constitution    culled  out  nine 

propositions including the following:-




     "(2) Interlocutory   orders,   passed   by   the   courts 
     subordinate   to   the   High   Court,   against   which 
     remedy   of   revision   has   been   excluded   by   
CPC 
     Amendment Act
 46 of 1999 are nevertheless open to 
     challenge   in,   and   continue   to   be   subject   to, 
     certiorari   and   supervisory   jurisdiction   of   the 
     High Court.



     (3)   Certiorari,   under   
Article   226
   of   the 
     Constitution,   is   issued   for   correcting   gross 
     errors   of   jurisdiction   i.e.   when   a   subordinate 
     court   is   found   to   have   acted   (i)   without 
     jurisdiction   -   by   assuming   jurisdiction   where 
     there   exists   none,   or   (ii)   in   excess   of   its 
     jurisdiction   -   by   overstepping   or   crossing   the 
     limits   of   jurisdiction,   or   (iii)   acting   in 
     flagrant   disregard   of   law   or   the   rules   of 
     procedure or acting in violation of principles of 
     natural   justice   where   there   is   no   procedure 
     specified,   and   thereby   occasioning   failure   of 
     justice.



      (4) Supervisory jurisdiction under 
Article 227
 of 
      the   Constitution   is   exercised   for   keeping   the 
      subordinate   courts   within   the   bounds   of   their 
      jurisdiction.     When   the   subordinate   Court   has 
      assumed a jurisdiction which it does not have or 
      has   failed   to   exercise   a   jurisdiction   which   it 
      does have or the jurisdiction though available is 
      being   exercised   by   the   Court   in   a   manner   not 
      permitted by law and failure of justice or grave 
      injustice   has   occasioned   thereby,   the   High   Court 
      may   step   in   to   exercise   its   supervisory 
      jurisdiction.



      (5) Be it a writ of certiorari or the exercise of 
      supervisory   jurisdiction,   none   is   available   to 
      correct mere errors of fact or of law unless the 
      following   requirements   are   satisfied:   (I)   the 
      error is manifest and apparent on the face of the 
      proceedings   such   as   when   it   is   based   on   clear 
      ignorance or utter disregard of the provisions of 



                                    7




      law, and (ii) a grave injustice or gross failure 
      of justice has occasioned thereby."



 
In 
Shalini Shyam Shetty vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil
 

(supra),   the   Court   again   examined   the   scope   of   the   High 

Court's power under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution and laid 

down the following proposition:




     "
Article   227
   can   be   invoked   by   the   High   Court 
     suo   motu   as   a   custodian   of   justice.   An   improper 
     and   a   frequent   exercise   of   this   power   will   be 
     counterproductive   and   will   divest   this 
     extraordinary power of its strength and vitality. 
     The   power   is   discretionary   and   has   to   be 
     exercised   very   sparingly   on   equitable   principle. 
     This   reserve   and   exceptional   power   of   judicial 
     intervention   is   not   to   be   exercised   just   for 
     grant of relief in individual cases but should be 
     directed   for   promotion   of   public   confidence   in 
     the   administration   in   the   larger   public   interest 
     whereas   
Article   226
   is   meant   for   protection   of 
     individual grievances. Therefore, the power under 
     
Article 227
 may be unfettered but its exercise is 
     subject   to   high   degree   of   judicial   discipline. 
     The   object   of   superintendence   under   
Article   227
, 
     both   administrative   and   judicial,   is   to   maintain 
     efficiency, smooth and orderly functioning of the 
     entire   machinery   of   justice   in   such   a   way   as   it 
     does not bring it into any disrepute.   The power 
     of   interference   under   
Article   227
   is   to   be   kept 
     to   the   minimum   to   ensure   that   the   wheel   of 
     justice does not come to a halt and the fountain 
     of   justice   remains   pure   and   unpolluted   in   order 
     to   maintain   public   confidence   in   the   functioning 
     of   the   tribunals   and   courts   subordinate   to   the 
     High Court."



 
The   learned   Single   Judge   of   the   High   Court   totally 

ignored   the   principles   and   parameters   
laid   down   by
   this 

Court for exercise of power under 
Articles 226
 and 
227
 of 

the   Constitution   qua   an   interlocutory   order   passed   by   the 



                                    8




Subordinate   Court   and   set   aside   the   order   of   the   trial 

Court without assigning any tangible reason.


            The   next   question   which   needs   consideration   is 

whether a litigant filing the list of witnesses is bound to 

indicate, howsoever briefly, the relevance of the witness to 

the subject matter of the suit etc., and, in any case, one 

party   to   the   proceedings   cannot   cite   the   advocate 

representing the other side as a witness and thereby deprive 

the   latter   of   the   services   of   the   advocate   without 

disclosing as to how his testimony is relevant to the issues 

arising in the case.   
In 
Mange Ram vs. Brij Mohan
 (supra), 

this Court interpreted Order XVI Rule 1 (1),(2) and (3) 
CPC
 

and observed:




      "If   the   requirements   of   these   provisions   are 
      conjointly read and properly analysed, it clearly 
      transpires that the obligation to supply the list 
      as   well   as   the   gist   of   the   evidence   of   each 
      witness whose name is entered in the list has to 
      be carried out in respect of those witnesses for 
      procuring   whose   attendance   the   party   needs   the 
      assistance of the court."



      At   this   stage,   we   may   also   advert   to   the   nature   of 

relationship   between   a   lawyer   and   his   client,   which   is 

solely   founded   on   trust   and   confidence.     A   lawyer   cannot 

pass on the confidential information to anyone else. This is 

so   because   he   is   a   fiduciary   of   his   client,   who   reposes 

trust and confidence in the lawyer. Therefore, he has a duty 

to fulfill all his obligations towards his client with care 



                                    9




and act in good faith. Since the client entrusts the whole 

obligation of handling legal proceedings to an advocate, he 

has   to   act   according   to   the   principles   of   uberrima   fides, 

i.e.,   the   utmost   good   faith,   integrity,   fairness   and 

loyalty.  



              The   duties   of   an   advocate   to   the   Court,   the 

client, opponent and colleagues are enumerated in Chapter II 

of   Part   IV   of   the   Bar   Council   of   India   Rules,   1975   (for 

short, "the Rules").  Rules 12, 13, 14 and 15 of Section II, 

Chapter II of Part IV of the Rules, which regulate the duty 

of an advocate to the client, read as under:


      "12. An   advocate   shall   not   ordinarily   withdraw 
      from   engagements,   once   accepted,   without 
      sufficient   cause   and   unless   reasonable   and 
      sufficient   notice   is   given   to   the   client.     Upon 
      his withdrawal from a case, he shall refund such 
      part of the fee as has not been earned.



      13.     An   advocate   should   not   accept   a   brief   or 
      appear in a case in which he has reason to believe 
      that he will be a witness, and if being engaged in 
      a case, it becomes apparent that he is a witness 
      on   a   material   question   of   fact,   he   should   not 
      continue to appear as an advocate if he can retire 
      without jeopardising his client's interests.



      14.     An advocate shall, at the commencement of his 
      engagement   and   during   the   continuance   thereof, 
      make   all   such   full   and   frank   disclosures   to   his 
      client relating to his connection with the parties 
      and   any   interest   in   or   about   the   controversy   as 
      are   likely   to   affect   his   client's   judgment   in 
      either engaging him or continuing the engagement.



      15.     It   shall   be   the   duty   of   an   advocate 
      fearlessly to uphold the interests of his client 
      by all fair and honourable means without regard to 



                                     10




      any   unpleasant   consequences   to   himself   or   any 
      other.     He   shall   defend   a   person   accused   of   a 
      crime regardless of his personal opinion as to the 
      guilt   of   the   accused,   bearing   in   mind   that   his 
      loyalty is to the law which requires that no man 
      should be convicted without adequate evidence." 



              An   analysis   of   the   above   reproduced   Rules   show 

that one of the most important duty imposed upon an advocate 

is  to  uphold  the  interest  of  the  client  fearlessly  by  all 

fair   and   honourable   means.     An   advocate   cannot   ordinarily 

withdraw   from   engagement   without   sufficient   cause   and 

without   giving   reasonable   and   sufficient   notice   to   the 

client.     If   he   has   reason   to   believe   that   he   will   be   a 

witness in the case, the advocate should not accept a brief 

or appear in the case.   
In  
V. C. Rangadurai  v.  D. Gopalan
 

(1979) 1 SCC 308, A.P.Sen, J. outlined the importance of the 

relationship of an advocate with his client in the following 

words:




           "Nothing should be done by any member of the legal 
           fraternity   which   might   tend   to   lessen   in   any 
           degree   the   confidence   of   the   public   in   the 
           fidelity, honesty and integrity of the profession. 
           Lord   Brougham,   then   aged   eighty-six,   said   in   a 
           speech, in 1864, that the first great quality   of 
           an advocate  was 'to reckon everything subordinate 
           to the interests of his client'.  What he said in 
           1864   about   'the   paramountcy   of   the   client's 
           interest',   is   equally   true   today.     The   relation 
           between   a     lawyer   and   his   client   is   highly 
           fiduciary   in   its   nature   and   of   a   very   delicate, 
           exacting,   and   confidential   character   requiring   a 
           high   degree     of   fidelity   and   good   faith.     It   is 
           purely   a   personal   relationship,   involving   the 
           highest personal trust and confidence which cannot 
           be   delegated   without   consent.     A   lawyer   when 



                                    11




         entrusted with a brief, is expected to follow the 
         norms   of   professional   ethics   and   try   to   protect 
         the interests of his clients, in relation to whom 
         he   occupies   a   position   of   trust.     The   appellant 
         completely   betrayed   the   trust   reposed   in   him   by 
         the complainants." 



            If   the   prayer   made   by   the   respondents   for   being 

allowed to cite Shri N. Ravindranath Kamath as a witness is 

critically   scrutinised   in   the   backdrop   of   the   above   noted 

statement on the duties of an advocate towards his client, 

we   have   no   hesitation   to   hold   that   the   same   was   not   only 

misconceived   but   was   mischievous   ex-facie.   Neither   in   the 

written statement nor the additional written statement filed 

by   them   before   the   trial   Court,   the   respondents   had 

attributed   any   role   to   Shri   N.   Ravindranath   Kamath   in 

relation to the subject matter of the suit.   The concerned 

advocate   was   engaged   by   the   plaintiffs-appellants   in   1996 

i.e. almost 11 years prior to the filing of application by 

the respondents under Order XVI Rule 1(1) and (2) read with 


Section   151
   CPC.     During   this   long   interregnum,   the 

respondents   never   objected   to   the   appearance   of   Shri   N. 

Ravindranath   Kamath   as   an   advocate   of   the   appellants   by 

pointing out that he was interested in the subject matter of 

the suit. Notwithstanding this, the respondents cited him as 

a witness in the list filed along with the application.  The 

sole   purpose   of   doing   this   was   to   create   a   situation   in 

which the advocate would have been forced to withdraw from 



                                   12




the case.  Luckily for the appellants, the trial Court could 

see   the   game   plan   of   the   respondents   and   frustrated   their 

design   by   partly   dismissing   the   application.     The   learned 

Single Judge ignored that the respondents had included the 

name of Shri N. Ravindranath Kamath in the list of witnesses 

proposed  to  be  summoned  by  them  with  an  oblique  motive  of 

boarding him out of the case and passed the impugned order 

by recording one line observation that the respondents were 

not   required   to   give   reasons   for   summoning   the   particular 

person as a witness.



            We may add that if the parties to the litigation 

are allowed to file list of witnesses without indicating the 

purpose   for   summoning   the   particular   person(s)   as 

witness(es),   the   unscrupulous   litigants   may   create   a 

situation   where   the   cases   may   be   prolonged   for   years 

together.     Such   litigants   may   include   the   name   of   the 

advocate representing the other side as a witness and if the 

Court casually accepts the list of witnesses, the other side 

will   be   deprived   of   the   services   of   the   advocate. 

Therefore, it would be a prudent exercise of discretion by 

the   Court   to   insists   that   the   party   filing   the   list   of 

witnesses  should briefly  indicate the  purpose of  summoning 

the particular person as a witness.    



      In   the   result,   the   appeal   is   allowed,   the   impugned 



                             13




order is set aside and the one passed by the trial Court is 

restored. The  respondents shall  pay cost  of Rs.50,000/-  to 

the appellants.





                                   ........................J.
                                   (G.S. SINGHVI)            





                                   ........................J.
                                   (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY)      
NEW DELHI,
FEBRUARY 22, 2011.