Zafruddin Khan vs A.M.U. And Ors on 14 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
2
, Cited by 
0
]










User Queries


locus standi


public interest litigation 


aligarh muslim university


public interest litigation for publicity


public interest


muslim


"public interest litigation" 


"locus standi" 


public interest litigation, public interest


academic










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Zafruddin Khan vs A.M.U. And Ors on 14 February, 2011


Bench: 
A.K. Patnaik
, 
R.V. Raveendran


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.1862 OF 2011
                [Arising out of SLP(C) No.32148/2010]



ZAFRUDDIN KHAN                                          ...APPELLANT 


                                                vs.

ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY &                             ...RESPONDENTS
ORS.





                                 O R D E R



         Leave granted.  Heard.





 2.      The   appellant   filed   a   Public   Interest   Litigation   in 

 the Allahabad High Court for a declaration that the decision 

 of the Aligarh Muslim University (`AMU' for short), the first 

 respondent herein, to establish special campus centres across 

 India was illegal and for a direction to the said University 

 not   to   establish   a   campus   at   Chelemala   at   Perinthalmanna 

 Mallapuram Kerala. The appellant relied upon 
Section 5(9A)
 of 

 the   Aligarh   Muslim   University   Act,   1920   in   support   of   his 

 contentions.   The   said   petition   was   resisted   by   the 

 respondents   inter   alia   on   the   ground   that   appellant   had   no 

 locus   standi   to   file   such   a   petition   and   justifying   the 

 action by relying upon 
Section 12(2)
 of the said Act.



                                          2


3.       The said writ petition has been dismissed by the High 

Court   by   the   impugned   order   dated   7.10.2010   on   the   ground 

that   the   appellant   does   not   have   any   locus   standi   to   file 

such   public   interest   litigation.   The   High   Court   was   of   the 

view   that   only   a   Member   of   the   University   Senate   or 

University Academic Council or University Court could file a 

writ   petition   for   the   reliefs   sought   by   the   appellant.   The 

High Court was also of the view that the fundamental rights 

of the appellant were not affected by the proposed action of 

the   University   and   therefore,   the   writ   petition   was   not 

maintainable. The High Court consequently dismissed the writ 

petition   with   an   observation   that   if   any   aggrieved   person 

having a locus files a proper petition, the dismissal of the 

appellant's   petition   will   not   come   in   the   way   of   such 

petition   being   entertained.   The   said   order   is   challenged   in 

this appeal by special leave.





4.       The appellant has pointed out that apart from being a 

Member   of   the   Bar,   he   is   a   former   President   of   the   Student 

Union   of   the   AMU,   former   elected   Member   of   AMU   Court,   Life 

Member of AMU Old Boys Association and Donor Life Member of 

the   AMU.   He   had   produced   documents   in   support   of   the   said 

averments. The said averments are not shown to be false. The 

appellant   claims   that   his   only   interest   in   filing   the   writ 

petition   was   to   ensure   that   AMU   continues   to   be   an 



                                        3





Institution of academic excellence and that no action of the 

University   should   dilute   its   academic   excellence.   On   the 

other   hand,   the   respondents   contend   that   the   writ   petition 

was   filed   with   the   oblique   motive   of   maligning   the   Vice 

Chancellor of the University. It is not necessary to examine 

that aspect now.





5.      We are of the view that having regard to the fact that 

the appellant was a former student and elected Member of AMU 

Court   and   is   also   a   Donor   Life   Member,   he   has   sufficient 

interest   to   file   the   writ   petition   in   public   interest.   The 

High   Court   ought   not   to   have   dismissed   the   public   interest 

litigation only on the ground of locus standi of appellant to 

file the writ petition.





6.      We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the order 

of the High Court and restore the public interest litigation 

to the file of the High Court without expressing any opinion 

on the merits of the case. The respondents will be entitled 

to  contest  the  writ  petition  by  urging  all  contentions  open 

to   them   in   law,   including   the   contention   relating   to   the 

alleged malafides of the appellant.





                                                ......................J.
                                               ( R.V. RAVEENDRAN )



                                    4






New Delhi;                                  .....................J.
February 14, 2011.                            ( A.K. PATNAIK )