Vishnu Agarwal vs State Of U.P. & Anr on 22 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
4
, Cited by 
215
]










Top AI Tags


appeal-to-supreme-court, power-to-issue-writ


criminal-procedure-code






User Queries


recall petition


recall of order


markandey katju


section 362


vishnu agarwal


recall of witness: judgments


court master


"markandey katju"


"recall" its own order   


sudha


review in a review










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Vishnu Agarwal vs State Of U.P. & Anr on 22 February, 2011


Bench: 
Gyan Sudha Misra
, 
Markandey Katju


           ITEM NO.110               Court No.6             SECTION II

            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 1323 OF 2004

VISHNU AGARWAL                                    Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

STATE OF U.P. & ANR.                              Respondent(s)

(With office report )

WITH APPEAL(CRL) NO. 875 of 2006
(With office report)

Date: 23/02/2011  These Appeals were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MARKANDEY KATJU
        HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GYAN SUDHA MISRA

For Appellant(s)      Mr. Manoj Swarup, Adv.
                      Ms. Lalita Kohli, Adv.
                      Mr. Abhishek Swarup, Adv.
               for  M/S Manoj Swarup & Co.,Adv.

                    Mr. Siddhartha Dave, Adv.
                      Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija

For Respondent(s)     Mr. Sandeep Singh, Adv.
                    Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija,Adv.

                      M/S Manoj Swarup & Co.

           UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R 

Crl. Appeal No. 1323 of 2004


           The appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed.


Crl. Appeal No. 875 of 2006




           The Appeal is dismissed as having become infructuous.





     ( Deepak Mansukhani )                         ( Indu Satija )
           Court Master                             Court Master

           (The signed order is placed on the file)
                                                          REPORTABLE


                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1323 OF 2004



VISHNU AGARWAL                                    Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

STATE OF U.P. & ANR.                              Respondent(s)

                                      WITH

                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 875 OF 2006



                                      O R D E R

Criminal Appeal No. 1323/2004

            Heard learned Counsel for the parties.

            This appeal has been filed against the impugned Judgment of 

the   Allahabad   High   Court   dated   29.1.2004   in   Criminal   Revision   No. 

136/1998. 



            It appears that the aforesaid Criminal Revision was listed in 

the   High   Court   on   2.9.2003.     No   one   appeared   on   behalf   of   the 

Revisionist,   though   the   Counsels   for   respondents   appeared.     In   these 

circumstances, the judgment was passed.





      Subsequently,   an   application   was   moved   for   recall   of   the   Order 

dated 2.9.2003 alleging that the case was shown in the computer list 

and   not   in   the   main   list   of   the   High   Court,   and   hence,   the   learned 

Counsel for the Revisionist had not noted the case and hence he did not 

appear.



                                              -2-


      It often happens that sometimes a case is not noted by the Counsel 


or his clerk in the cause list, and hence, the Counsel does not appear. 

This   is   a   human   mistake   and   can   happen   to   anyone.     Hence,   the   High 

Court   recalled   the   order   dated   2.9.2003   and   directed   the   case   to   be 

listed   for   fresh   hearing.     The   aforesaid   order   recalling   the   order 

dated 2.9.2003 has been challenged before us in this appeal.





 
Learned  Counsel  for  the  appellant  has  relied  on  the  decision  of 

this Court in 
Hari Singh Mann Vs. Harbhajan Singh Bajwa
 AIR 2001 SC 43. 

Para 10 of 
the said judgment
 states:


            "     Section 362 of the Code mandates that no Court, 
      when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing 
      of   a   case   shall   alter   or   review   the   same   except   to 
      correct a clerical or arithmetical error.  The Section is 
      based   on   an   acknowledged   principle   of   law   that   once   a 
      matter is finally disposed of by a Court, the said Court 
      in the absence of a specific statutory provision becomes 
      functus   officio   and   disentitled   to   entertain   a   fresh 
      prayer   for   the   same   relief   unless   the   former   order   of 
      final   disposal   is   set   aside   by   a   Court   of   competent 
      jurisdiction   in   a   manner   prescribed   by   law.     The   Court 
      becomes   functus   officio   the   moment   the   official   order 
      disposing of a case is signed.   Such an order cannot be 
      altered except to the extent of correcting a clerical or 
      arithmetical   error.     The   reliance   of   the   respondent   on 
      Talab   Haji   Hussain's   case   (AIR   1958   SC   376)(supra)   is 
      misconceived.     Even   in   that   case   it   was   pointed   that 
      inherent   powers   conferred   on   High   Courts   under   Section 
      561A(Section   482   of   the   new   Code)   has   to   be   exercised 
      sparingly, carefully and with caution and only where such 
      exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down 
      in   the   section   itself.     It   is   not   disputed   that   the 
      petition   filed   under   Section   482   of   the   Code   had   been 
      finally disposed of by the High Court on 7.1.1999.   The 
      new Section 362 of the Code which was drafted keeping in 
      view   the   recommendations   of   the   41st  Report   of   the   Law 
      Commission and the Joint Select Committees appointed for 
      the purpose, has extended the bar of review not only to 
      the judgment but also to the final orders other than the 
      judgment."

                                           -3-


            Learned Counsel for the appellant Mr. Manoj Swarup submitted 

that in view of the aforesaid decision, the High Court erred in law in 


recalling the Order dated 2.9.2003.  We regret we cannot agree.  





            In our opinion, Section 362 cannot be considered in a rigid 

and over technical manner to defeat the ends of justice.  As Brahaspati 

has observed :





            "Kevalam Shastram Ashritya Na Kartavyo Vinirnayah

            Yuktiheeney Vichare tu Dharmahaani  Prajayate"



      which means:  



      "The Court should not give its decision based only on the letter 

of the law.



        For   if   the   decision   is   wholly   unreasonable,   injustice   will 

follow."



      Apart from the above, we are of the opinion that the application 

filed   by   the   respondent   was   an   application   for   recall   of   the   Order 

dated  2.9.2003  and  not  for  review.    
In  
Asit  Kumar  Vs.  State  of  West 

Bengal and Ors.
 2009(1) SCR 469, this Court made a distinction between 

recall and review which is as under:-


                                    -4-


 
"There   is   a   distinction   between   ......   a   review 
      petition   and   a   recall   petition.     While   in   a   review 
      petition, the Court considers on merits whether there is an 
      error   apparent   on   the   face   of   the   record,   in   a   recall 
      petition the Court does not go into the merits but simply 


     recalls   an   order   which   was   passed   without   giving   an 
     opportunity   of   hearing   to   an   affected   party.     We   are 
     treating   this   petition   under   
Article   32
   as   a   recall 
     petition   because   the   order   passed   in   the   decision   in   
All 
     Bengal Licensees Association Vs. Raghabendra Singth & Ors.
 
     [2007(11)   SCC   374]   cancelling   certain   licences   was   passed 
     without   giving   opportunity   of   hearing   to   the   persons   who 
     had been granted licences."




    Hence, we see no error in the impugned order passed by the 

High Court.



     The appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed.




Crl. Appeal No. 875 of 2006


             The Appeal is dismissed as having become infructuous.






                                               .......................J.
                                               (MARKANDEY KATJU)



                                               .......................J.
                                               (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)

NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY 23, 2011