Rajalingam vs State Rep.By Inspector Of Police on 23 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
3
, Cited by 
1
]










Top AI Tags


murder


common-intention


death-by-negligence






User Queries


electrocution


302/34


section 304


"Transformers 


304 a


sec302/34


electricity board










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Rajalingam vs State Rep.By Inspector Of Police on 23 February, 2011


Bench: 
Harjit Singh Bedi
, 
Chandramauli Kr. Prasad


                                                             1




                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 11 OF 2005




RAJALINGAM                                                .... APPELLANT


                                    Versus


STATE REP. BY INSPECTOR OF POLICE   .... RESPONDENTS





                                       O R D E R



1.      Three   accused,   including   the   sole   appellant   herein,   were   put   on 


trial   for   offence   under   
Section   302
/
34
   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code, 


alternatively   under   
Section   304-A
   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code.     The   Trial 


Court   convicted   the   appellant   under   
Section   302
   and   other   two   accused 


under   
Section   302
/
34
   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   and   sentenced   them   to 


undergo life imprisonment.





2.      Aggrieved   by   the   conviction,   they   preferred   C.A.   No.   287   of   1998 


and   the   Madras   High   Court   by   the   impugned   judgment   maintained   the 


conviction of the sole appellant but set aside the conviction and sentence 


of the other two accused persons and that is how the appellant is before 


us with the leave of the Court.





3.      According   to   the   prosecution,   the   appellant   was   employed   as 


wireman   while   the   other   accused   persons   were   employed   as   lineman   at 


the   Divisional   Office   of   the   State   Electricity   Board,   Pallapatty.       The 



                                                2





deceased   Anandhan,   the   son   of   P.W.-1   Ponnambalam   and   P.W.-17 


Shanmigathai   were   employed   as   contract   labourers   in   the   Board. 


According to the prosecution, prior to the date of incident, the staff of the 


Electricity   Board   collected   donation   during   the   Ramzan   festival   but   the 


deceased   refused   to   be   associated   with   the   collection   of   donation.     It   is 


alleged that during that period, appellant told him that he would be killed 


by   electrocution.     The   prosecution   has   further   alleged   that   on   6th  of 


August,1991   at   about   5.30   p.m.,   the   appellant   alongwith   other   accused 


came to the residence of the deceased and told him that an electric fault is 


to be rectified at Chinna Odai Street, Pallapatti.   The deceased Anandhan 


was taken to the said place for rectification of the fault and was asked to 


climb   on   the   electric   post.     According   to   the   prosecution,   appellant   was 


standing   down   the   electric   post   while   the   other   accused   were   near   the 


transformer   and   had   switched   off   the   electric   line.     It     has   further   been 


alleged   that   while   the   work   was   going   on,   the   appellant   informed     the 


other   accused   that  work  is   over   and   they   can   switch   on  the   line   and   as 


directed, the line was switched on and the deceased who was at work was 


electrocuted.   In   relation   to   the   incident,   a   report   was   submitted   by 


Kannan   (P.W.-15),   Junior   Engineer   of   the   Electricity   Board   to   the   Police 


Station   and   after   investigation,   charge   sheet   under   
Section   304-A
   of   the 


Indian   Penal   Code   was   filed.     It   is   relevant   here   to   state   that   P.W.-1 


Ponnambalam, the father of the deceased filed complaint inter alia alleging 


that  the  appellant   alongwith  other   accused  committed  the   murder   of  his 



                                             3





son in furtherance of their common intention.  





4.      The trial of the accused persons, for offence under 
Section 304-A
 of 


the   Indian   Penal   Code   was   pending   before   the   Magistrate   whereas   the 


prosecution   under   
Section   302
/
34
   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   was   before 


the Sessions Judge.  As both the prosecutions related to the same offence, 


the matter pending before the Magistrate for trial was sent to the Sessions 


Judge and both the cases were tried together in which common evidence 


was led.  





5.      The   Trial   Court,   on   appreciation   of   the   evidence,   came   to   the 


conclusion   that   all   the   accused   in   furtherance   of   their   common   object 


caused   the   death   of   the   deceased   Anandhan   and   accordingly   convicted 


and sentenced all of them as above.





6.      On appeal, the High Court acquitted the other accused persons but 


convicted  the  appellant  under  
Section   302
  of  the   Indian  Penal  Code  and 


while doing so, observed as follows:





              "18. Therefore, from the circumstances available, it would  

      be abundantly clear that it was A-1 who with his previous motive  

      aggrieved over the non-cooperation  of the deceased in respect of  

      collection   of   amounts   during   Ramzan   festival   has   taken   him   to  

      the   electric   post  No.  235  and   asked   him to  do  the  work.     When  

      the  deceased  was  carrying  on the  work,  A-1 gave instruction  to  

      A-2 and A-3 to switch on the transformer and caused his death."



7.      Mr. S. GuruKrishna Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 


the  appellant   submits   that  in the  police  case  and  in  the  complaint  case, 


different   allegations   have   been   levelled,   which   renders   the   prosecution 


story unreliable. He points out that the evidence of P.W.-2 Rengan, P.W.-3 



                                               4





Azhagan and P.W.4 Sampath were recorded for the first time in Court and 


they have admitted this fact in their cross-examination. He has referred to 


the topography of the place of occurrence as had surfaced in the evidence 


of prosecution witnesses and submits that from their evidence, it is clear 


that distance between transformer and the electric post was not only large 


but   intervened   by   several   buildings   and   therefore   it  was  not  possible   for 


the appellant to give signal for switching on the line to the other accused. 


He has also referred to the evidence of P.W.-5 and submits that from his 


evidence, it would be evident that the prosecution has not come up with 


the true story.  On all these grounds, the appellant deserves to be granted 


the benefit of doubt, submits Mr. Kumar.





8.        Ms.   Promila,   learned   counsel,   however,   representing   the 


respondents   submits   that   both   the   Courts   have   concurrently   found   the 


appellant  guilty,  his  conviction does  not deserve  any  interference by  this 


Court.





9.        We   have   appreciated   the   rival   submissions   and   find   substance   in 


the submission of Mr. S. GuruKrishna Kumar.   P.W.-2 Rengan is a road 


side   astrologer   and   claimed   to   be   a   witness   to   the   occurrence   but   has 


admitted  that his statement was never recorded by the police during the 


course   of   investigation   and   for   the   first   time   he   is   deposing   during   the 


trial.   Similar is the admission of P.W.-3 Azhagan, a rickshaw puller and 


P.W.-4   Sampath,   a  Tailor.     P.W.-5  Gopal  has   stated  in  his  evidence  that 


the accused Sundararaj (since acquitted) had gone to the work at Chinna 



                                               5





Odai   Street   after   switching   off   the   line   from   the   transformer   and   after 


completing   the   work,   he   returned   and   switched   on   the   electricity   line. 


According   to   his   evidence,   while   the   acquitted   accused   was   near   the 


transformer, the appellant herein, came and asked to switch off the line as 


the deceased had got shock on the pole.  He has not been declared hostile 


by the prosecution.  From his evidence, it seems that the transformer was 


at   a   distance   from   the   electric   pole   where   the   deceased   got   electrocuted 


and   the   appellant   rushed   there   to   ensure   that   the   line   is   switched   off. 


Thus, this witness has come out with an entirely different story.   Further 


from the topography of the place of occurrence, it was not feasible for the 


appellant   to   instruct   other   accused   standing   near   the   transformer   to 


switch on the line.  In the face of the aforesaid, we are of the opinion that 


it would be unsafe to sustain the conviction of the appellant on the basis 


of   the   evidence   on   record.     Accordingly,   he   is   entitled   to   be   given   the 


benefit of doubt and we grant him that.





 10.    The appellant is on bail.  He shall be discharged of his bail bonds.



11.     In   the   result,   the   appeal   is   allowed,   impugned   judgment   of 


conviction and sentence is set aside with the direction aforesaid.






                                                     ................................................J.

                                                 ( HARJIT SINGH BEDI )





                                                     ................................................J.



                                     6





                                              ( CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD )

NEW DELHI,

FEBRUARY 23, 2011.