Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug vs Union Of India & Ors on 18 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
0
, Cited by 
0
]














Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug vs Union Of India & Ors on 18 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 3786, 2011 (15) SCC 480, AIR 2012 SC (SUPP) 435, (2011) 1 CLR 586 (SC), (2011) 2 SCALE 503


Bench: 
Gyan Sudha Misra
, 
Markandey Katju


                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

             WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO(s). 115 OF 2009

ARUNA RAMCHANDRA SHANBAUG                    Petitioner(s)

                               VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                        Respondent(s)


                              O  R  D  E  R



            In the above case Dr. J.V. Divatia on 17.02.2011 

handed over the report of the team of three doctors whom we 

had appointed by our order dated 24th  January, 2011. He has 

also handed over a CD in this connection. Let the report as 

well as the CD form part of the record.





            On mentioning, the case has been adjourned to be 

listed on 2nd March, 2011 at the request of learned Attorney 

General   of   India,   Mr.   T.R.   Andhyarujina,   learned   Senior 

Advocate,   whom   we   have   appointed   as   amicus   curiae   in   the 

case   as   well   as   Mr.   Shekhar   Naphade,   learned   Senior 

Advocate for the petitioner.



            We request the doctors whom we had appointed viz., 

Dr. J.V. Divatia, Dr. Roop Gurshani and  Dr. Nilesh Shah to


                                     :1:





appear   before   us   on   2nd  March,   2011   at   10.30   A.M.   in   the 


Court, since it is quite possible that we may like to ask 

them questions about the report which they have submitted, 

and   in   general   about   their   views   in   connection   with 

euthanasia.



            On   perusal   of   the   report   of   the   committee   of 

doctors to us we have noted that there are many technical 

terms which have been used therein which a non-medical man 

would   find   it   difficult   to   understand.     We,   therefore, 

request the doctors to submit a supplementary report by the 

next   date   of   hearing   (by   e-mailing     copy   of   the   same   two 

days before the next date of hearing) in which the meaning 

of these technical terms in the report is also explained.




            The Central Government is directed to arrange for 

the air travel expenses of all the three doctors as well as 

their stay in a suitable accommodation at Delhi and also to 

provide them necessary conveyance and other facilities they 

require, so that they can appear before us on 02.03.2011.


            An honorarium may also be given to the doctors, if 

they   so   desire,   which   may   be   arranged   mutually   with   the 

learned Attorney General.



            The Dean of King Edward Memorial Hospital as well 

as   Ms.   Pinky   Virani   (who   claims   to   be   the   next   friend   of 

the   petitioner)   are   directed   to   intimate   the 

brother(s)/sister(s)  or  other  close  relatives  of   the


                                      :2:



petitioner that the case will be listed on 2nd  March, 2011 

in the Supreme Court and they can put forward their views 

before the Court, if they so desire.   Learned counsel for 

the   petitioner   and   the   Registry   of   this   Court   shall 

communicate a copy of this Order forthwith  to  the  Dean, 

KEM Hospital.   The Dean, KEM Hospital is requested to file 

an affidavit stating his views regarding the prayer in this 

writ petition, and also the condition of the petitioner.


             Copy   of   this   Order   shall   be   given   forthwith   to 

learned Attorney General of India, Mr. Shekhar Naphade and 

Mr. Andhyarujina, learned Senior Advocates.  





             Let   the   matter   be   listed   as   the   first   item   on 

2nd March, 2011.





                                     ...........................J.
                               (MARKANDEY KATJU)




                                     ............................J.
                               (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)
NEW DELHI;

FEBRUARY 18, 2011.



                                     :3: