Ranu Hazarika & Ors vs State Of Assam & Ors on 28 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
5
, Cited by 
13
]










User Queries


selection process is over


ncte


slp


diploma


d k jain


education teacher


advertising










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Ranu Hazarika & Ors vs State Of Assam & Ors on 28 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 1597, 2011 (3) AIR JHAR R 420, 2011 LAB IC 1536, 2011 (4) SCC 798, (2011) 2 SERVLR 392, (2011) 3 SCALE 37, (2011) 2 SCT 329, (2011) 2 ESC 346, (2011) 1 GAU LT 52, (2011) 2 SERVLJ 144, 2011 (2) KLT SN 80 (SC), 2011 (8) ADJ 116 NOC


Author: 
D.K. Jain


Bench: 
D.K. Jain
, 
H.L. Dattu


                                                                               REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                          CIVIL  APPEAL  NO.2153 OF 2011

                     (Arising out of S.L.P (C) No. 17397 of 2009)


      RANU HAZARIKA & ORS.                                        --       APPELLANTS


                                            VERSUS


      STATE OF ASSAM & ORS.                                       --       RESPONDENTS


                                             WITH


                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2154-2167 of 2011

                (Arising out of S.L.P (C) Nos. 19816-19829 of 2009)


                                                 &

                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2168-2170 of 2011

                (Arising out of S.L.P (C) Nos. 10052-10054 of 2010)




                                      J U D G M E N T



D.K. JAIN, J.:



1.       Leave granted.





2.    This batch of appeals, by grant of leave, arises out of judgments and or-



      ders dated 9th April 2009, 22nd June 2009, 17th July 2009 and 18th Septem-



      ber   2009   respectively   passed   by   the   Gauhati   High   Court   at   Guwahati. 



      By the impugned judgments, the High Court has held that the Assam Ele-



      mentary   Education     (Provincialization)   (Amendment)   Rules,   2005   (for 


   short "the Amendment Rules, 2005") are ultra vires the provisions of the 


   National Council for 
Teacher Education Act, 1993
 (for short "the Act") 


   and the Regulations framed thereunder. 



3. The material facts leading up to the filing of the writ petitions before the 


   High Court may be stated as follows :



      The National Council for Teacher Education (for short "the NCTE") 


was set up in the year 1973 by a Government Resolution as a National Ex-


pert Body to advise the Central and State Governments on all matters per-


taining to teacher education. Since the role assigned to the NCTE was purely 


advisory in nature, it had very little impact on the standards of teacher train-


ing institutions in the country and on their unplanned growth.  Therefore, in 


order to empower the NCTE to make qualitative improvements in the sys-


tem of teacher training, in the year 1993, the Act was enacted by the Parlia-


ment giving statutory recognition to the NCTE.  It is manifest from the Pre-


amble to the Act that it had been enacted with a view to achieving planned 


and coordinated development; and proper maintenance of norms and stand-


ards in the teacher education system etc. throughout the country.





4. 
Section 12
 of the Act enumerates the functions of the NCTE.  Primarily, 


   it provides that it shall be the duty of the NCTE to take all such steps as it 




                                                                              2



   may think fit to ensure that there is planned and coordinated development 


   of teacher education and proper standards in that behalf, determined by it, 


   are maintained.  For achieving the object for which the Act was enacted, 


   several functions enlisted in the Section have been assigned to the NCTE, 


   which includes laying down guidelines in respect of minimum qualifica-



   tions for a person to be employed as a teacher in schools or in recognized 


   institutions.   
Section 32
 of the Act confers on the NCTE power to make 


   Regulations.   Sub-clause (d)(i) of sub-section (2) of 
Section 32
 provides 


   that the NCTE may lay down minimum qualifications for a person to be 


   employed as a teacher under clause (d) of 
Section 12
.  Under Section 33 


   of the Act, the Regulations made by the NCTE are required to be laid  be-



   fore each House of Parliament and it is only upon due approval of such 


   Regulations   or   upon   modifications   as   may   be   made   by   the   Parliament 


   that the Regulations take effect. 



5. In exercise of powers conferred on the NCTE under 
Section 32(2)(d)(i)
 


   of   the   Act,   it   framed   a   set   of   Regulations   viz.   National   Council   for 


   Teacher   Education   (Determination   of   Minimum   Qualifications   for   Re-



   cruitment of Teachers in Schools) Regulations, 2001.  In the schedule to 


   the said Regulations, the minimum academic and professional qualifica-



   tions for recruitment of teachers at different levels have been stipulated. 



                                                                                           3


      In so far as,  the elementary/primary schools are concerned, the qualifica-



      tions prescribed by the schedule are as follows :



          "(i) Senior Secondary School Certificate.



          (ii) Diploma of certificate in basic teachers training of a dura-


          tion of not less than two years,

           Or

           Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.E.Ed)"



The   said   Regulations   further   contemplated   that   the   existing   Recruitment 


Rules would be modified within a period of three years so as to bring such 


Rules in conformity with the qualifications prescribed in the schedule to the 


Regulations. 





6.    In   the   State   of   Assam,   in   March   1999,   a   pre-service   teacher's   training 


      course of two years duration leading to award of diploma had been intro-



      duced and the admission to the said course was regulated by an advertise-



      ment published in the newspapers on 14th April, 1999.  In the said advert-



      isement,  it was mentioned that the pre-service training course leading to 


      an award of diploma in education, for which applications were invited, 


      had been designed to secure improvement of the professional skill of the 


      persons to be recruited as teachers in elementary schools against the va-



      cancies   that will occur in the near future.   Admittedly, most of the writ 


      petitioners had applied for joining the diploma course pursuant to the said 




                                                                                              4



      notice/advertisement and thus, completed the two years course leading to 


      the award of diploma.  After the commencement of the said course in the 


      year   2000,   two   batches,   totalling   900   persons,   completed   the   course, 


      qualified   and   were   awarded   diploma.   However,   the   State   Government 


      discontinued the course with effect from the year 2003.



7.    It seems that on the insistence of the NCTE, the State of Assam amended 


      the Assam Elementary Education (Provincialization) Rules, 1977 with ef-



      fect from 10th  November, 2005. By the said amendment instead of mak-



      ing the requirement of a diploma in teachers training mandatory, as stipu-



      lated in the Regulations framed by the NCTE, it was provided that prefer-



      ence   to   trained   candidates   will   be   given.     Schedule-I   to   the   amended 


      Rules stipulated that such preference will be in the form of 10 additional 


      marks to trained teachers in the selection process for the recruitment of 


      teachers. Having carried out the said amendment, an employment notice 


      dated 2nd December, 2005 was issued in the newspapers inviting applica-



      tions   for   filling   up   5372   posts   of   Assistant   Teachers.     The   prescribed 


      minimum   educational   qualification   was   higher   secondary,   with   prefer-



      ence to trained candidates. 



8.    Being aggrieved by the said amendment which waived the requirement of 


      a diploma for selection of teachers, a group of writ petitions were filed, 



                                                                                             5



   seeking   quashing   of   the   Amendment   Rules,   2005,  inter-alia,   on   the 


   ground   that   the   amendment   was   not   in   conformity   with   the   Statutory 


   Regulations framed by the NCTE.   A prayer for setting aside advertise-



   ment dated 2nd December 2005 was also made.



9. In the writ proceedings, the State chose not to spell out its stand on the is-



   sue,  inasmuch  as neither  a counter  affidavit on its  behalf was filed  nor 


   any instructions were imparted to the counsel representing it before the 


   High Court.  Under the given circumstances, the High Court proceeded to 


   decide the writ petitions on the basis of the material available on record.



10.As stated above, by the impugned judgment, the High Court has struck 


   down the Amendment Rules, 2005, observing thus :



      "15.   In   the   present   group   of   cases,   as   already   noticed,   the 

      State has neither filed an affidavit nor has the State taken any 

      particular   stand   before   the   Court.   No   compelling   reasons   dic-

      tated by public interest have been disclosed by the State to en-

      able the Court to understand that the provisions of the Amend-

      ment Rules,   though in departure from the Regulations framed 

      by the Council, is dictated by acceptable reasons in public in-

      terest.  Though in the course of the hearing the learned Standing 

      Counsel of the Department  has pointed out that in the State of 

      Assam teachers in lower Primary schools are required to under-

      go a Basic training course after  their appointment and till com-

      pletion of the said course such teachers are not put on the regu-

      lar   scale   of  pay,   the   said   facts   cannot   constitute   adherence   or 

      even substantial compliance with the provisions of the Regula-

      tions in as much as the Regulations prescribe completion of the 

      teachers   training   course   as   a   positive   condition   of   eligibility 



                                                                                             6



       which is conspicuously absent   in the Amendment  Rules. The 

       failure of the State to show any compelling or supervening cir-

       cumstances   justifying   the   said  departure   from  the  Regulations 

       has, therefore, to be understood by the Court to be due to the 

       absence of any such reasons.   In such a situation, the require-

       ment  of  adherence  to  the  statutory  Regulations  framed  by   the 

       Council cannot be left to be determined at the discretion of the 

       authorities of the State Government of Assam.   That apart, the 

       Regulations framed (sic) by the Council has the effect of enhan-

       cing the quality of education at the primary level and in the ab-

       sence of any compelling reason to justify a departure therefrom, 

       the Court would lean in favour of an interpretation that would 

       advance the cause of quality education in the State.



       16.     Consequently   and   in   the   light   of   the   foregoing   discus-

       sions the provisions of the Assam Elementary Education (Pro-

       vincialization) (Amendment) Rules, 2005 insofar as                     giving 

       of preference to trained teachers is concerned is held to be in-

       valid being contrary to the provisions of the National Council 

       for Teachers Education Act, 1993 and the Regulations framed 

       thereunder.  As a corollary thereto, it will now be incumbent on 

       the part of the State Government to revive the training institutes 

       for imparting pre-service teachers training of two years duration 

       leading to award of diploma."





Insofar   as   the   recruitment   process   initiated   by   the   issue   of   advertisement 


dated 2nd  December 2005 by the State Government, granting preference to 


the trained teachers was concerned, the High Court observed that since the 


Amendment Rules, 2005, which had now been adjudged as illegal and ultra  


vires  the Act, were in force when the said advertisement was issued, if the 


State  is  inclined  to complete  the recruitment process initiated  pursuant   to 


the said advertisement, it may be completed in terms of the said advertise-



ment.  However, henceforth and in the  future, the  process of recruitment of 



                                                                                          7



teachers in the lower Primary Schools will have to conform to the require-



ment of academic  and professional qualifications spelt out by the National 


Council for Teachers Education (Determination of Minimum Qualifications 


for Recruitment of Teachers in Schools) Regulations, 2001. 



11. Being aggrieved with the observations in respect of advertisement dated 



    2nd December 2005, the diploma holders are before us in these appeals.  



12.At   the  outset,   it   is   pertinent   to  note   that  the   State   Government  has   not 


    questioned the correctness of the impugned judgments.  However, in the 


    counter affidavit filed on behalf of the State, it is stated that in further-



    ance   of   the   recruitment   process,   a   select   list   had   been   prepared   by   the 


    District Committees but the same could not be published because of cer-



    tain directions by the Gauhati High Court in another set of cases filed for 


    regularization of OBB teachers.



13.We have heard Mr. R.F. Nariman, learned senior counsel appearing for 


    the appellants and Mr. Avijit Roy, learned counsel for the State.



14. It   was   submitted   by   learned   counsel   for   the   appellants   that   having   de-



    clared the Amendment Rules, 2005 as illegal, the High Court fell into an 


    error  in  not  setting  aside  the  entire  selection   process   initiated   vide  em-



    ployment notice dated 2nd December, 2005.   It was asserted that once the 



                                                                                               8



   Amendment Rules, 2005, on the basis whereof the said notice was issued, 


   had been declared as null and void, the High Court had no option but to 


   quash the entire recruitment process.  



15. Learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   State,   on   the   other   hand,   submitted 



   that since the High Court had left it to the State to take decision in respect 


   of the selection process initiated vide advertisement dated 2nd  December 


   2005, the State Government in its own wisdom decided to go ahead with 


   the said selections, though appointment letters had not yet been issued to 


   the selected candidates.



16. Having bestowed  our anxious consideration to the matter, we are of the 



   opinion that the decision of the High Court, permitting the State Govern-



   ment  to continue with the recruitment process, initiated  on the basis of 


   the Amendment Rules, 2005 which have been declared by it to be illegal 


   is clearly indefensible.   Having clearly held that "the requirement of ad-



   herence to the Statutory Regulations framed by the NCTE cannot be left 


   to be determined at the discretion of the authorities of the State Govern-



   ment and that there was no compelling reason with the State to justify a 


   departure from the Statutory Regulations, any action under illegal rules 


   would   be   null   and   void",   the   High   Court   could   not   have   permitted   the 


   State   Government  to   perpetuate   an   illegality.     To   say   the   least,   we   are 



                                                                                            9



     equally amazed by the stand of the State Government.   Having failed to 


     sustain the Amendment Rules, 2005 before the High Court, it would be 


     improper for the State to go ahead with the recruitments under the said 


     amended   Rules   which   have   been   declared   null   and   void,   particularly 


     when   the   decision   of   the   High   Court   on   that   issue   has   not   been   ques-



     tioned by it.   We are of the view that the impugned observation by the 


     High Court would be clearly inimical to the rule of law.  While it is trite 


     that   Courts   can   exercise   judicial   discretion   in   moulding   the   relief, 


     however, such discretion cannot be exercised to perpetuate and encour-



 
age an illegality. (See : 
M.I. Builders Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Radhey Shyam Sahu  


     & Ors.1
)


17. For the foregoing reasons, the appeals are allowed; the leave granted by 



     the High Court to the State to complete the selection process in terms of 


     employment notice dated 2nd December, 2005 is set aside and the said no-



     tice (dated 2nd December, 2005) is also quashed.



18.However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we make no order as 


     to costs.



                                                    ...........................................



1 (1999) 6 SCC 464



                                                                                               1



                                      (D.K. JAIN, J.) 





                                            ............................................



                                     (H.L. DATTU, J.)

NEW DELHI;



FEBRUARY  28, 2011.



RS






                                                          1