M/S. Mustan Taherbhai vs Commnr. Of Central Excise & Customs on 28 February, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
14
, Cited by 
1
]










User Queries


custom duty


bonded warehouse


auction


customs act


d k jain










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


M/S. Mustan Taherbhai vs Commnr. Of Central Excise & Customs on 28 February, 2011


Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 1580, 2011 (4) SCC 660, AIR 2011 SC (SUPP) 259, (2011) 2 RECCIVR 602, (2011) 3 KCCR 185, (2011) 3 SCALE 27


Author: 
D.K. Jain


Bench: 
H.L. Dattu
, 
Asok Kumar Ganguly
, 
D.K. Jain


                                                                               REPORTABLE


                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CIVIL  APPEAL NO. 3788 OF 2003



 M/S. MUSTAN TAHERBHAI                                     --      APPELLANT 


                                       VERSUS


 COMMNR. OF CENTRAL EXCISE &                               --      RESPONDENT

 CUSTOMS





                                  J U D G M E N T



D.K. JAIN, J.:



1. This appeal, under 
Section 130E
 of the Customs Act, 1962 (for short "the 


   Act"), is directed  against order dated 18th February, 2003, passed by the 


   Customs, Excise & Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, as it existed at the 


   relevant   time,   (for   short   "the   Tribunal").   By   the   impugned   order   the 


   Tribunal   has   dismissed   the   appeal   filed   by   the   appellant   herein   and 


   confirmed the levy of customs duty on the ocean going vessel, registered 






                                                                                       1



   as M.V. Jagat Priya, purchased by them in a Court auction, for breaking/ 


   scrapping purpose in terms of Notification No. 133/87-Cus.




2. M.V. Jagat Priya was manufactured by M/s. Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. in 


   the   year   1975   in   a   Customs   Bonded   Warehouse   at   Vishakapatanam, 


   using   certain   imported   items.   The   said   vessel   was   cleared   on   30th 


   November, 1975, and was delivered to M/s. Dempo Steamship Ltd. for a 


   consideration of `7,61,12,400/- and Central Excise duty at the rate of 1% 


   was paid thereon.  The vessel was registered as Indian vessel tonnage and 


   flying an Indian flag. However, it ceased to ply and was grounded at Bedi 


   Bunder, Jamnagar, in June 1986.   On 16th  October, 1992, an order was 


   passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Admiralty suit at 


   the instance  of Union of India  and the Shipping  Credit  and Investment 


   Co. of India Ltd. for auction of the vessel on "as is where is" basis "free 


   from all encumbrances and existing liens". 





3. On 12th  February, 1993, the vessel was auctioned and being the highest 


   bidder,   the   appellant   viz.   M/s.   Mustan   Taherbhai   purchased   the   vessel. 



   The sale in favour of the appellant was confirmed by the High Court and 


   in   furtherance   thereof,   the   possession   of   the   ship   was   delivered   on   4th 


   March,   1993.   Thereafter,   on   10th  May,   1993,   on   the   direction   of   the 


   Superintendent of Central Excise  & Customs, the appellant filed a bill of 




                                                                                            2



   entry claiming that the ship was an Indian built ship, and therefore, no 


   customs   duty   was   payable.   On   12th  May,   1993,   the   Superintendent   of 


   Central   Excise,   Jamnagar   passed   a   provisional   assessment   order 


   demanding  customs   duty   @   5%,   and   an   additional   duty   of  `1000/-   per 


   LDT. 



4. Being   aggrieved,   the   appellant   preferred   Special   Civil   Application   No. 


   4924   of   1993   before   the   High   Court   of   Gujarat.   The   High   Court,   vide 


   interim order dated 25th  May, 1993, permitted the appellant to clear the 


   materials  obtained by breaking the ship in question without payment of 


   provisional duty on the condition that the appellant will file a bond with 


   security   deposit.   Vide   order   dated   23rd  July,   1993,   the   High   Court 


   disposed   of   the   said   application,   and   directed   the   appellant   to   file   an 


   appeal   before   the   Commissioner   (Appeals).   Accordingly,   the   appellant 


   preferred an appeal before the Commissioner (Appeals).



5. The   Commissioner   (Appeals),   vide   order   dated   29th  April,   1994, 


   dismissed the appeal and confirmed the order of provisional assessment 


   dated 12th May, 1993.



6. Being  aggrieved,  the appellant  preferred  an appeal  before the Tribunal. 



   Vide   order   dated   10th  July,   1998   the   Tribunal   dismissed   the   appeal. 



                                                                                            3


    Relying on the decision of this Court in Union of India & Ors. Vs. M/s.  



    Jalyan   Udyog   &   Anr.1,  the   Tribunal   observed   that     Notification   No. 


    133/87-Cus   was   applicable   in   the   instant   case,   and   therefore,   the 


    appellant   was   liable   to   pay   customs   duty   on   the   vessel   at   the   rate 


    prevalent at the time of breaking of ship.



7. Being dissatisfied,   the appellant preferred an application under 
Section 


    129(B)(2)
   of   the   Act   praying   for   rectification   of   mistakes   in   the   order, 


    dated   10th  July,   1998,   on   the   ground   that   the   Tribunal   had   erroneously 


    concluded   that:   (i)   the   goods   manufactured   in   a   customs   bonded 


    warehouse were similar  to goods imported under the Act; (ii) the issue 


    for determination before it was whether Notification No. 133/87-Cus was 


    applicable or not, whereas the real issue for determination was whether 


    the vessel was imported or indigenously manufactured; (iii) the customs 


    duty under Notification No. 133/87-Cus was payable when Notification 


    No.   118/59-Cus   was   applicable;   (iv)   since   the   vessel   was   subsequently 


    being   broken   up,   its   clearance   would   be   governed   by   Notification   No. 


    262/58-Cus; and (v) the decision in Jalyan Udyog (supra) was applicable 


    to the facts of the present case.



1 (1994) 1 SCC 318





                                                                                              4


8. Vide   order   dated   13th  April,   1999,   the   Tribunal   dismissed   the   said 


    application   on   the   ground   that   it   is   a   settled   position   that   goods 


    manufactured in a customs bonded warehouse are treated akin to goods 


    manufactured in a foreign country, and when the vessel was taken out of 


    the country for plying as foreign going vessel, and subsequently, the said 


    vessel is brought back to India for breaking purposes, it amounts to re-



    import.



9. Aggrieved, the appellant preferred yet another application under 
Section 


    129(B)(2)
   of   the   Act   for   rectification   of   mistakes   in   the   order   of   the 


    Tribunal dated 13th April, 1999 on the ground that in Union of India Vs.  


    Baijnath  Melaram2, this Court had affirmed  the Bombay High Court's 


    decision wherein it was held that no customs duty was payable on vessels 


    which are subject to breaking, if the said vessels had been manufactured 


    in India. Vide order dated 8th  October, 1999, the Tribunal dismissed the 


    said   application   as   well,   holding   that   it   had   correctly   relied   on   the 


    decision of this Court in Jalyan Udyog (supra).



10.Still aggrieved, the appellant preferred C.A. No. 1998 of 2000 before this 


    Court. Vide order dated 30th  August, 2001, this Court, while remanding 


    the matter back to the Tribunal, observed thus:



2 1998 (97) ELT 27 (SC)





                                                                                              5



      "It   appears   from  the  judgment   of the  Tribunal  that  the  matter 

      was argued without reference to facts which are now stated in 

      the special leave petition, namely, that the vessel was built in 

      India   and   excise   duty   was   paid   thereon   at   the   time   of   its 

      clearance.  It was delivered to an Indian party.  The contention 

      on  these  facts  is   that  this  was  not  a  transaction  of  export   and 

      import which would render the appellants liable to the payment 

      of     customs duty.





 
Reliance by the Tribunal upon the decision of this Court in the 

      case of 
Union of India & Ors.  vs.  Jalyan Udyog &  Ors.
  (1994 

      (1) S.C.C.   318) would be misplaced   if   these are, indeed, the 

      facts for that was not a case that related to a   vessel   that   was 

      built  in India  and  cleared  for  home consumption.   We think 

      it   appropriate,   in   the   circumstances,   that   the   order   under 

      challenge should be set aside and the matter be remanded to the 

      Tribunal to be considered afresh. In so doing, the Tribunal shall 

      determine, first,   the  facts          and  then  the  law.
     The  Tribunal 

      may   take   note   of   the   judgment   of   the     Bombay   High   Court 

      delivered on 5th February, 1992  in the  case of M/s.  Baijnath 

      Melaram vs.   Union of India & Ors. (Writ Petition No.1478 of 

      1983),   special   leave   petitions   whereagainst   were   summarily 

      dismissed.  It may be noted that we express no  opinion on the 

      merits of the case  on  either side."



It is plain from a bare reading of the said order that this Court had directed 


the Tribunal to first appreciate the facts of the case and then determine the 


question of leviability of import duty on an Indian built ship which was sold 


for breaking. It is evident from the afore-extracted paragraph that the Court 


had observed that reliance by the Tribunal on the decision of this Court in 



Jalyan Udyog
 (supra) would be misplaced.




                                                                                          6


11.Accordingly, the Tribunal re-considered the matter. As stated above, vide 


   the   impugned   order,   the   Tribunal   has   dismissed   the   appeal,   observing 


   thus:



      "The   fact   that   Notification   No.   118/59-Cus.   was   not   in 

      existence at the date on which the vessel was cleared by HSL 

      having been superseded by Notification No. 163/65-Cus. came 

      to light only on the submissions made by Shri Pundir. It would 

      appear that at all times it was wrongly presumed that the earlier 

      Notification was in existence. We do not see the revelation as 

      bringing   on   record   new   facts.   We   see   it   as   correction   of   the 

      factual error, which had existed in the record at all times. We 

      find no substance in the submissions of Shri Doiphode, that a 

      new case is being made out by the Revenue at the present stage.



      14. It has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that as far as 

      facts are concerned, the Tribunal is the final authority and the 

      Court   would   go   into   only   the   questions   of   law   at   the   appeal 

      stage.   Therefore,   the   Tribunal   would   first   record   the   correct 

      facts and then in the factual perspective would locate and apply 

      the relevant law.





      15. When the fact is accepted that Notification 118/59-Cus. did 

      not   exist   at   the   time   of   clearance   of   the   vessel   from   the 

      Shipyard, the persistent plea that the ship was manufactured in 

      the warehouse and that it was manufactured in India and that it 

      attracted excise duty alone need not be considered at all. Since 

      on   the   date   of   such   clearance,   the   notification   in   force   was 

      113/83-Cus.,   the   provisions   thereof   would   apply   and   the   duty 

      would   be   payable   in   terms   of   the   conditions   in   the   said 

      notification.





      16. Since we have so held the question of the applicability of 

      the High Court judgment in the case of Baijnath Melaram does 

      not arise."





12.Hence, the present appeal.



                                                                                             7


13.Mr. Joseph Vellapally, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 


   appellant,  strenuously urged that in the instant case the imported goods 


   lost their identity when they were used in the manufacture of vessel along 


   with   domestically   procured   goods,   and   were   cleared   as   such,   and 


   therefore, the revenue cannot claim on the one breath   that the ship was 


   "manufactured" in India and attracted excise duty at the time of clearance 


   and on the other breath cannot contend that the ship was manufactured 


   abroad and was exigible to levy of customs duty when it is to be cleared 


   for breaking at an Indian coast.   Learned counsel urged that once excise 


   duty has been levied and paid on goods, there is no question of levy of 


   customs   duty   under   
Section   3
   of   the   Customs   Tariff   Act,   1975   as   the 


   latter is meant to neutralize the non-levy of excise duty.



14.Learned counsel contended that 
Section 21
 of the erstwhile Sea Customs 


   Act,   1878   provided   that   when   any   article   liable   to   duty   forms   part   or 


   ingredient of a good, then such good would be liable to full duty as if it 


   was entirely composed of such article. In the absence of such a charging 


   provision in the Act, ships manufactured by Hindustan Shipyard in India 


   cannot   be  subjected   to  customs  duty  at  the   time of  clearance   for  home 


   consumption.   Relying   on   the   decisions   of   this   Court   in  The   State   of  






                                                                                            8



    Tamil   Nadu  Vs.  M.K.   Kandaswami   &   Ors.3  and  In  Re.  Sea   Customs  


    Act, 1878   
S. 20
.4, learned counsel submitted that no customs duty was 


    chargeable in the instant case, in as much as the ship was not a "taxable 


    good" as it was not imported as defined under 
Section 2(25)
 of the Act. 



    Moreover,   there   was   no   "taxable   event"   as   there   was   no   import   in   the 


    instant   case,   and   the   appellant   being   an   auction-purchaser   cannot   be 


    likened   to   an   importer   under   the   Act.   Relying   on   the   decision   of   this 


    Court   in  Baijnath   Melaram  (supra),   learned   counsel   urged   that   no 


    customs   duty   can   be   levied   on   Indian   built   ships.   Learned   counsel 


    asserted that the Tribunal had not complied with the order of this Court 


    dated   30th  August,   2001   in   as   much   as   it   has   failed   to   consider   the 


    judgment   of   the   Bombay   High   Court   in  M/s.   Baijnath   Melaram  Vs.  


    Union of India & Ors.  (W.P. 1478 of 1983), nor has it determined the 


    question   of   liability   to   import   duty   of   an   Indian   built   ship,   after 


    evaluating     the   factual   background   of   the   case   as   was   specifically 


    directed. 
Relying on the decision of this court in  
Hyderabad Industries  


    Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Union of India & Ors.5
, learned counsel urged that even 


    if it is held that customs duty is payable in the instant case, no additional 


    customs duty is leviable as excise duty had already been paid.




3 (1975) 4 SCC 745

4 (1964) 3 SCR 787

5 (1999) 5 SCC 15





                                                                                             9


15.Per   contra,  Mr.   Hairsh   Chander,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   on 


   behalf   of   the   Revenue,   while   supporting   the   impugned   judgment, 


   contended   that   at   the   time   of   clearance   of   the   ship,   Notification   No. 


   118/59-Cus   was   not   in   force,   as   the   same   had   been   superseded   by 


   Notification No. 163/65-Cus. At the time the appellant presented the bill 


   of entry, however, Notification No. 133/87-Cus was in force, as rightly 


   concluded by the Tribunal. 



16.Learned   counsel   urged   that   when   a   ship   is   manufactured   in   a   bonded 


   warehouse, for all purposes, it is deemed to be manufactured in a foreign 


   country, and by virtue of Notification No. 133/87-Cus, a legal fiction is 


   created whereby when the ship manufactured in a bonded warehouse is 


   brought to India for breaking purposes, it is deemed to be manufactured 


   in a foreign country and appropriate duty has to be paid for clearance for 


   ship   breaking.   Learned   counsel   contended   that   the   said   Notification   is 


   clear, and admits of no ambiguity, and it is settled that when a fiction is 


   created  by  law,   the  Courts  must  give   full  effect   to  the   fiction.  Learned 


   counsel urged that in terms of the Notification and as was observed by 


   this Court in 
Jalyan Udyog
 (supra), the date relevant for determining the 


   value and rate of the customs  duty chargeable is the date on which the 


   ship   is   broken   up,   which   should   be   reckoned   as   the   date   on   which 





                                                                                          1



    permission   for   breaking   up   is   accorded   by   the   Director   General   of 


    Shipping. Learned counsel submitted that the fact that the appellant was 


    an   auction-purchaser   is   inconsequential   in   as   much   as   Notification   No. 


    133/87-Cus was a conditional notification, viz. when the ship is broken, 


    customs duty as prevalent on the date of breaking will have to be paid, 


    and therefore, customs duty was required to be paid in terms of 
Sections 


    12
 and 
15
 read with 
Section 68
 of the Act.
 
Learned counsel also argued 


    that 
Section 68
 of the Act makes it clear that when the importer of any 


    warehoused  goods  intends  to  clear  them  for  home consumption,  then  a 


    bill of entry for home consumption has be to be filed, and the import duty 


    leviable   on   such   goods   has   to   be   paid   by   the   importer,   as   was   held   in 


    
D.C.M. & Anr. Vs. Union of India & Anr.
 6. Learned counsel submitted 


    that   
Section   9
   of   the   Act   makes   it   clear   that   clearance   from   a   Bonded 


    warehouse  is to be treated  as  an import into India.  It  was also  stressed 


    that clearance of vessel was in terms of the exemption notification, which 


    stipulated payment of appropriate customs duty prevalent at the time of 


    its   breaking.
 
Reliance   was   placed   on   the   decisions   of   this   Court   in 


    
Hansraj   Gordhandas  Vs.  H.H.   Dave,   Assistant   Collector   of   Central  


    Excise & Customs, Surat & Ors.7
; Novopan India Ltd., Hyderabad Vs.  




6 1995 Supp (3) SCC 223

7 (1969) 2 SCR 253





                                                                                                 1



    Collector          of   Central   Excise   And   Customs,   Hyderabad8              and 


    Commissioner   of  Central  Excise  and  Customs,  Indore  Vs.  Parenteral  


    Drugs India Ltd.9 to contend that the terms of an exemption notification 


    have to be construed strictly.




17.Having bestowed our anxious consideration, we are constrained to hold 


    that the impugned judgment deserves to be set aside on the short ground 


    that   while   deciding   the   case,   the   Tribunal   has   ignored   the   specific 


    directions issued by this Court, vide order dated 30th  August, 2001. It is 


    evident from the impugned order, in particular from paras 15 and 16 that 


    the Tribunal has not appreciated the facts obtaining in the present case in 


    their correct perspective, which   has resulted in vitiating its decision on 


    the question of leviability of import duty.  Although, from para 14 of the 


    impugned   order   it   is   evident   that   the   Tribunal   was   conscious   of   the 


    direction of this Court that it was required to first record the correct facts 


    and then in the factual perspective locate and apply the relevant law, yet 


    in the very next paragraph it proceeds to hold that when it is accepted that 


    Notification No. 118/59-Cus. did not exist at the time of clearance of the 


    vessel   from   the   ship   yard,   the   persistent   plea   that   the   ship   was 


    manufactured in a warehouse located in India and therefore, it attracted 



8 1994 Supp (3) SCC 606

9 (2009) 14 SCC 342





                                                                                         1



    excise duty alone need not be considered at all.  In our opinion, in light of 


    the decision and directions of this Court in C.A. 1998 of 2000, judicial 


    discipline   obliged   the   Tribunal   to   examine   the   entire   legal   issue   after 


    ascertaining   the   foundational   facts,   regardless   of   its   earlier   view   in   the 


    matter. Therefore, the decision of the Tribunal cannot be sustained.  



18.We   are   thus,   convinced   that   it   is   a   fit   case   which   should   be   remanded 


    back   to   the   Tribunal   for   fresh   adjudication   and   determination   of   the 


    question of leviability of import duty on an Indian-built ship brought into 


    India   for   breaking   purpose.     For   the   view   we   have   taken,   we   deem   it 


    unnecessary to deal with other contentions urged by the learned counsel. 



19.Resultantly, the appeal is allowed; the impugned order is set aside, and 


    the  matter  is  remanded back   to  the  Tribunal   for  fresh  consideration,  in 


    accordance with law, bearing  in mind  the observations of this Court in 


    C.A. No. 1998 of 2000.  There will, however, be no order as to costs.



                                             .................................................



                                              (D.K. JAIN, J.) 






                                                                                              1



                           .................................................



                            (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY, J.) 





                                          ................................................



                              (H.L. DATTU, J.)

NEW DELHI;



FEBRUARY 28, 2011.



RS






                                                          1