Vijay Dhanji Chaudhary vs Suhas Jayant Natawadkar on 18 January, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
1
, Cited by 
4
]










Top AI Tags


advocates






User Queries


Supreme Court bar Association 


 special leave petition


advocates on record


" advocate on record "


Bar association 


books of accounts










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Vijay Dhanji Chaudhary vs Suhas Jayant Natawadkar on 18 January, 2010


Bench: 
A.K. Patnaik
, 
R.V. Raveendran


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                      CIVIL APPELLAETE JURISDICTION


                                    I.A. No. 2 of 2009


                                              In


                       Special Leave Petition No. 18481/2009





Vijay Dhanji Chaudhary                                                  ... Petitioner 


Vs. 


Suhas Jayant Natwadkar                                                  ... Respondent 





                                         O R D E R



        This is an application for restoration of SLP No.18481/2009 dismissed 


on   27.2.2009.   Having   noticed   certain   irregularities   in   the   application   for 


restoration   this   Court   made   an   order   on   30.10.2009,   relevant   portion   of 


which is extracted below: 



        "3.     What is puzzling is the role or rather the absence of the 

        role   of   the   Advocate-on-Record   in   this   matter.   Para   4   of   the 

        application   show   that   the   Advocate-on-Record   had   nothing   to 

        do with the special  leave  petition except  to lend his name  for 

        filing   the   petition.   He   did   not   take   instructions   from   the 

        client/petitioner. He did not prepare the special leave petition. 



                                        2




He   did   not   instruct   any   counsel.   He   was   not   required   to   or 

expected to attend the hearing of the case.





4.      The Supreme Court Rules, 1966 provide that though any 

advocate enrolled under the 
Advocates Act,1961
, is entitled to 

appear and plead before the Court, no advocate other than the 

Advocate-on-Record   shall   be  entitled   to  file   an   appearance   or 

act for a party in the Court [vide Rule 1, Rule 6(b) and Order 

IV]. Rule 5 provides that no advocate shall be qualified to be 

registered   as   Advocate-on-Record   unless   he   has   undergone 

training for one year with an Advocate-on-Record approved by 

the Court and thereafter has passed the tests held by the Court. 

Rule   6(a)   provides   that   an   Advocate-on-Record   shall,   on   his 

filing   memorandum   of   appearance   on   behalf   of   a   party, 

accompanied   by   vakalatnama   duly   executed   by   the   party,   be 

entitled to act as well as to plead for the party in the matter and 

to conduct and prosecute before the court all proceedings that 

may   be   taken   in   respect   of   the   said   matter   or   any   application 

connected with the same or any decree or order passed therein 

including  proceedings  in taxation  and applications  for review. 

Sub-clause   (c)   of   Rule   6   requires   all   Advocate-on-Record   to 

keep   such   books   of   account   as   may   be   necessary   to   show   in 

connection   with   his   practice   as   an   Advocate-on-Record, 

moneys received from or on account of and the money paid to 

or on account of each of his client.  





5.      Unfortunately,   many   special   leave   petitions   are   being 

filed   with   Advocate-on-Record   being   mere   name-lenders, 

without having, or taking, any responsibility for the case. As a 

result   of   prevalence   of   such   a   practice,   in   such   cases,   the 

Advocate-on-Record do not appear when the matters are listed 

either before the Registrars or before the Chamber Judge or the 

Court   nor   do   they   take   any   interest   or   responsibility   for 

processing   or   conducting   the   case.   They   also   play   no   role   in 

preparation   of   the   special   leave   petitions,   nor   ensure   that   the 

requirements of the Rules are fulfilled and effects are cured. If 

the role of an Advocate-on-Record is merely to lend his name 

for filing cases without being responsible for the conduct of the 

case,   the   very   purpose   of   having   the   system   of   Advocate-on-

Record would get defeated.





                                           3


      6.     The question that arises for reconsideration is whether an 

      Advocate-on-Record can  file appearance  as mere  name-lender 

      for facilitating filing of petitions by others, without performing 

      any of the functions associated with an Advocate-on-Record.



      7.     In   order   to   enforce   discipline   in   the   working   of 

      Advocate-on-Record and to avoid the misuse of the system, and 

      to ensure that the court has the benefit of effective assistance of 

      the Advocate-on-Record, a solution has to be found. 



      8.     We, therefore, direct issue of notice to the Advocate-on-

      Record Association and the Supreme Court Bar Association to 

      assist   us   to   find   appropriate   solutions   and   provide   necessary 

      checks and balances. The Registry is directed to furnish copies 

      of this order to the said Associations."         





2.    In response to it, we have received the following suggestions from the 


Advocate-on-Record   Association,   the   Supreme   Court   Bar   Association   and 


from several counsel: 



      1.     Suggestions by Supreme Court Bar Association 

             (by Mr. Ram Jethmalani through Mr. Sanjay Bansal, Sr.Adv.)



      2.     Suggestions filed by Mr. Vikas Singh, Sr. Adv.


             (on behalf of Non-AOR Association)



      3. Suggestions by Mr. KN Bhatt, Sr.Adv.



             (on behalf of Supreme Court Bar Association) 



      4.     Suggestions on behalf of AOR Association

             (filed by Mr.D.K. Garg, Adv.)



      5.     Brief Note of problems and suggestions filed by

             Mr. Sushil Kumar Jain, Adv.



                                                   4


              6.        Suggestions by C.Radha Krishna, Adv.



              7.        Suggestions filed by Mr. Bijan Ghosh, Adv.



              8.        Suggestions filed by Mr. Haroim Sharma,


              9.        Suggestions filed by Mr. K.R. Chitra, Adv.



              10.       Suggestions filed by Dr. Parvin Kumar Mutreja, Adv.



              11.       Suggestions filed by Mr. D.B. Vohra, Adv.



              12.       Suggestions filed by Mr. D.K.  Sinha, Av.



              13.       Suggestions filed by Mr. Ajay Pratap Singh, Adv.



3.            We   are   informed   by   the   registry   that   the   Rule   Committee   of   the 


Supreme Court of India is already seized of most of the issues that have been 


raised   in   these   suggestions.   Therefore   we   deem   it   appropriate   to   place   all 


these suggestions before the Rule Committee so that the Committee can take 


note   of   the   same   while   formulating   new   or   additional   rules   or   while 


suggesting amendments to the existing rules.  



4.            We may however like to refer to one common grievance which has a 


bearing on the availability of adequate number of Advocates-on-Record in 


regard to the AOR examinations. The examinations are held in the following 


four subjects: 



      (i)            Practice and procedure of the Supreme Court


      (ii)           Drafting


      (iii)          Elementary   knowledge   of   Book   Keeping   and   Accounts   and 

                     Professional Ethics


      (iv)           Leading cases.





                                              5


The   grievance   is   in   regard   to   the   third   paper   relating   to   Elementary 


Knowledge   of   Book   Keeping   and   Accounts,   being   a   part   of   the   AOR 


examination. 



5.     There   is   considerable   force   in   the   said   submissions.   Elementary 


knowledge of Book Keeping and Accounts might have been necessary five 


decades ago. But with the availability of appropriate computer software and 


the capacity  of the  AORs to engage Accountants,    AORs may  not require 


any knowledge of Book Keeping and Accounts to such an extent as to pass 


an   examination   in   that   subject.   The   interests   of   the   institution   would   be 


better served if the third paper is made purely one relating to Advocacy & 


professional   ethics,   by   deleting   the   part   relating   to   Book   Keeping   and 


Accounts.   Many   candidates   fail   in   the   Book   Keeping   and   Accounts   paper 


and   many   are   deterred   from   taking   the   AOR   examination   because   of   the 


Book Keeping and Accounts paper being a part of the AOR examination. If 


the same  is deleted, there would be better participation of the members of  


the Bar in the Advocate-on-Record examination thereby increasing number 


of   Advocates-on-Record,   which   will   improve   the   entire   system   of   filing 


cases and representation. We therefore commend appropriate amendment to 


the AOR Examination Regulation in this behalf. 



                                                6


       The   IA   for   restoration   is   allowed   subject   to   deposit   of   Rs.2500   as 


costs with the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee within four weeks.



                                  .                        ................................................J.

                                                          ( R.V. RAVEENDRAN )





New Delhi                                                .................................................J. 

October 12, 2011.                                         ( A.K. PATNAIK )



     7