S. Sharat Kumar & Anr vs State A.P. & Ors on 27 April, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
2
, Cited by 
3
]










Top AI Tags


high-courts-to-be-courts-of-record


contempt-of-court, fair-and-innocent-publication










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


S. Sharat Kumar & Anr vs State A.P. & Ors on 27 April, 2010


Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2010 SC 282


Bench: 
K.S. Radhakrishnan
, 
H.L. Dattu


                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.3607 OF 2002

S. Sharat Kumar and Anr.                                          ...Appellant(s)


                                     Versus


State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.                                  ...Respondent(s)


                                O    R    D    E    R


        This civil appeal arises out of an order passed by
the High Court of Judicature, Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad in
Suo Motu Contempt Case No.974 of 1999 dated 19th February,
2002.   By the impugned order, the High Court held that the
appellants     have     committed         act       of      contempt      under    the
provisions of 
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
, read with 
Article
215
 of the Constitution of India and sentenced each of them
to one month's simple imprisonment.                     However, in the interest
of justice, the High Court has observed that the sentence
shall remain suspended for a period of one year.                          It further
observed     that   if,     during       the       period    of     one   year,     the
contemnors are punished again in a contempt proceeding, the
order sentencing them shall become operative automatically;
however, if they are not convicted for contempt during the
period of     one   year,      the   sentence        of     imprisonment     awarded
against them shall not be carried out.

        This    Court,      while        entertaining         the    special      leave
petition,     granted     an     interim           order     in     favour   of     the
appellants.    That interim order is still in operation.

                                                                             ....2/-

                                      - 2 -

        At    the    time    of     hearing     of    the    civil   appeal,   the
contemnors have filed affidavits.                    In that affidavits they
have offered unconditional apology for having written the
controversial       news    items    in   one    of    the    newspapers.      The
contemnors are advocates and they were also journalists at
the relevant point of time.

        Taking into consideration the unconditional apology
offered by them, in our opinion, the sentence of imprisonment
imposed on the appellants by the High Court requires to be
set aside.    Accordingly, we take the affidavits filed by the
two contemnors on record and set aside the conviction and
sentence imposed on them by the High Court.                          We hope and
trust that the contemnors shall not commit the contempt again
and shall not write any articles in any newspapers, which
would   not   only     bring      down    their       prestige   but   also    the
prestige of the Institution.

        The civil appeal is, accordingly, allowed.



                                                     ......................J.
                                                     [H.L. DATTU]



                                                     ......................J.
                                                     [K.S. RADHAKRISHNAN]
New Delhi,
April 27, 2010.