Union Of India & Ors vs Jaswant Kumar on 28 April, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
0
, Cited by 
0
]










User Queries


acp 










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Union Of India & Ors vs Jaswant Kumar on 28 April, 2010


Bench: 
J.M. Panchal
, 
Harjit Singh Bedi


           C.A. No.     of 2010 @ SLP(C) 30194 of 2008

                                                        1





                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3940 OF 2010
                           [arising out of SLP(C) No. 30194 of 2008]
                                                
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                            .....    APPELLANTS




                                                     VERSUS


JASWANT KUMAR                                                    .....    RESPONDENT





                                                    O R D E R



        1.          Leave granted.



        2.          The   respondent   herein   was   appointed   as   a 

        Constable with the Central Reserve Police Force  on the 

        2nd  of April, 1991 and was posted   on polling duty in 

        District   Poonch,   Jammu   in   the   year   2002.     During   his 

        duty guarding ballot boxes, he suffered an injury in an 

        encounter   with   terrorists   and   as   a   result   of   a 

        ricochetting bullet, received a splinter injury to the 

        right   eye.     In   the   Court   of   Inquiry   that   followed 

        regarding   the   incident,   the   respondent   was   applauded 

        for his courage, intelligence and earnestness and was, 

        accordingly,  given some special benefits as well.  The 

        respondent   subsequently   filed   a   petition   before   the 

        High Court of Delhi claiming two reliefs:



C.A. No.     of 2010 @ SLP(C) 30194 of 2008


                                                 2






        (i)         the   benefits   of   the   Group   Personal   Accidental 

        Insurance Scheme (GPAIS Scheme) and 

        (ii)        accelerated   promotion   on   the   basis   of   Assured 


        Career Progression Scheme (ACP Scheme).


                    In so far as the first aspect is concerned, the 

        High   Court   in   its   judgment   expressed   surprise   that 

        though   the   papers   had   been   forwarded   to   the   United 

        India Insurance Company on 22nd  September, 2005, as it 

        was that agency which was to make the payment, nothing 

        had   been   done   for   almost   three   years   from   that   date 

        though the premium was being deducted every month from 

        the respondent's salary.  A direction was, accordingly, 

        issued to the Union of India to take up the matter with 

        the Insurance Company and to ensure that the benefit of 

        the   Group   Personal   Accident   Insurance   Scheme   were 

        remitted   to   the   respondent   with   interest   for   delayed 

        payment   as   per   the   norms   within   a   maximum   period   of 

        three months from the date of judgment.  


        3.          The   second   claim   of   the   respondent   herein   was, 

        however,  strongly controverted by the Union of India. 

        It was pointed out that as per condition No. 6 of the 

        ACP   Scheme,   promotions   were   to   be   made   from   amongst 

        those   persons   who   were   under   the   medical   category 

        Shape-1, and that the respondent herein was not of the 

        requisite category, as he had suffered an injury to the 


C.A. No.     of 2010 @ SLP(C) 30194 of 2008


                                                  3






        right   eye   and   as   such   was   not   entitled   to   promotion 

        notwithstanding   the   fact   that   his   case   for   promotion 

        had   been   forwarded   to   the   concerned   authority   and   he 

        had appeared in the test and passed the same as well. 

        The   High   Court   however,   observed   that   as   the 

        respondent's case had been forwarded for promotion and 

        he   had   actually   taken   the   test   and   passed   it 

        successfully   and   as   the   only   defence   of   the   Union   of 

        India   was   that   his   candidature   had   been   forwarded   by 

        mistake,  was a  factor that  did not  warrant that   the 

        respondent should be kept out of the promotion scheme. 

        The writ petition was, accordingly, allowed.  


        4.          The   present   appeal   has   been   filed   by   the   Union 

        of India impugning the judgment aforesaid. 


        5.          We   have   heard   the   learned   Additional   Solicitor 

        General   and   Mr.   Abhay   Kumar,   learned   counsel   for   the 

        respondent.



        6. In the facts and circumstances of the case that have 

        been brought to our notice by the learned counsel, more 

        particularly,   that   the   respondent   was   a   meritorious 

        person,   his   case   had   been   forwarded   for   accelerated 

        promotion under the ACP Scheme and that he had cleared 

        the test and completed the training as well and it was 

        at  that stage  that an  attempt was  being made  to keep 

        him   back   on   account   of   his   low   medical   category,   no 


C.A. No.     of 2010 @ SLP(C) 30194 of 2008


                                               4






        interference is called for in the peculiar facts of the 

        case.   However,   the   legal   issues   raised   are   kept   open 

        for   discussion   in   some   other   suitable   case.       We 

        further direct that the Union of India-appellant will 

        ensure that the Insurance Company which is not a party 

        before   us,   will   make   the   payment   to   the   respondent 

        within   a   period   of   three   months   from   today   in   terms 

        ordered by the High Court..



        7.          The appeal is disposed of accordingly.






                                                         ..................J
                                                         [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                         ..................J
                                                         [J.M. PANCHAL]

         NEW DELHI
         APRIL 28, 2010.