M/S Vinedale Distilleries Ltd.& Anr vs Dena Bank & Ors on 11 January, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
2
, Cited by 
0
]










Top AI Tags


appeal-to-debts-recovery-tribunal






User Queries


drt hyderabad


vinedale distilleries ltd


transfer petition


debts recovery tribunal


altamas kabir


drt


DRT DELHI 


recovery of debt


Dena Bank 


pending proceedings


"debt recovery tribunal" 


surinder singh










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


M/S Vinedale Distilleries Ltd.& Anr vs Dena Bank & Ors on 11 January, 2010


Equivalent citations: AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 695, 2010 AIR SCW 823, (2010) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 249, (2010) 1 CLR 302 (SC), (2010) 2 CIVLJ 320, (2010) 109 REVDEC 645, (2010) 4 ALL WC 4190, (2010) 109 CUT LT 449, (2010) 1 CAL LJ 321, 2010 (1) SCALE 405, 2010 (3) SCC 466, (2010) 1 SCALE 405, (2010) 4 CAL HN 1, (2010) 2 CAL HN 8


Author: 
Altamas Kabir


Bench: 
Surinder Singh Nijjar
, 
Aftab Alam
, 
Altamas Kabir


           ITEM No.1-A                  Court No.4               SECTION     XVI-A
(for judgment)

          S U P R E M E       C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                              RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

     Transfer Petition ) No. 740-741/08


M/S VINEDALE DISTILLERIES LTD. & ANR.                        Petitioner (s)

                                   VERSUS


DENA BANK & ORS.                                             Respondent (s)


Date : 11/01/2010    This    Petition was called on for judgment today.


  For Petitioner (s)       Mr. D.K. Sinha,Adv.


  For Respondent(s)    Ms. Manjusha        Wadhwa,Adv.

                       Mr. E. C. Agarwala,Adv.


                 Hon'ble Mr. Justice Altamas Kabir pronounced the

         Judgment      of    the   Bench    comprising      His   Lordship,

         Hon'ble     Mr.    Justice   Aftab    Alam   and    Hon'ble      Mr.

         Justice Surinder Singh Nijjar.

                 The Transfer Petitions are allowed in terms of

         the signed judgment       placed on the file.




             (Ganga Thakur)                      (Juginder Kaur)
            P.S. to Registrar                      Court Master

            (Signed non-Reportable judgment is placed on the file.)
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


     TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NOS.740-741 OF 2008



M/s Vinedale Distilleries Ltd.
and Another                              ... Petitioners

           Versus


Dena Bank and others                     ... Respondents


                    J U D G M E N T



ALTAMAS KABIR, J.





1.    These Transfer Petitions have been filed by M/s

Vinedale    Distilleries   Ltd.   for    transfer      of   two

Original    Applications   pending      before   the    Debts

Recovery Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as `the

DRT'), Hyderabad, to the DRT, Jhandewalan, Delhi.

While O.A. No.29 of 2000 was filed by Dena Bank

against the Petitioner Company, S.A. No.157 of 2008

was filed by the Petitioner Company against Dena

                                                                            4





Bank     before         the     DRT,          Hyderabad.         The     said

applications had been made on the basis of an order

passed    by     this    Court       on       4th   January,      2008,    in

Transfer       Petition       (C)     No.945        of    2006.        While

allowing    the       said    Transfer         Petition     and     thereby

transferring         various        suits       pending     between       the

parties before the Civil Court in Andhra Pradesh to

the Delhi High Court, this Court, on consent of the

parties, also directed as follows :-



       "In order to avoid any future confusion,
       on consent of the parties, any suit which
       may be filed in future touching upon the
       control and management of the Company in
       question,       should       be        filed      before    the
       Hon'ble       Delhi    High         Court,        which    will
       decide the matters."



2.     Having       regard    to     the       above     direction,       the

Petitioners herein have prayed that the two above-

mentioned matters filed under the provisions of the


Recovery       of    Debts     Due       to     Banks     and     Financial

Institutions Act, 1993
 (hereinafter referred to as

                                                                              5





`the 
DRT Act
') and 
Section 17
 of the Securitization

and     Reconstruction              of        Financial        Assets       and

Enforcement       of         Security              Interest     Act,       2002

(hereinafter      referred              to    as    `the    Securitization

Act'), both pending before the DRT, Hyderabad, be

transferred to the DRT, Jhandewalan, Delhi.


3.    Appearing in support of the Transfer Petitions,

Mr.     Chetan        Sharma,           learned        Senior       Advocate,

submitted that since by virtue of the aforesaid

order     dated        4th     January,             2008,     all     matters

pertaining       to     the        Petitioner          Company      and     its

management had been transferred to the Delhi High

Court in order to avoid confusion, the proceedings

pending    before        the        DRT,       Hyderabad,        were      also

required to be transferred to the DRT, Jhandewalan,

Delhi,    so     that        all    matters          pertaining      to    the

Vinedale Distilleries and its management could be

heard    and   disposed            of    by    the     Delhi    High      Court

exclusively.      Mr. Sharma submitted that in order to

avoid a possible conflict of decisions among Courts

operating in different territorial jurisdictions in

                                                              6





regard   to   the    management      and    control   of    the

Petitioner    Company,    this   Court     had   directed   all

matters relating to the Company and its management

to be decided by the Delhi High Court exclusively.

Mr. Sharma submitted that even further proceedings

against the Award of the DRT in Delhi would have to

be filed before the Delhi High Court which was also

in   seisin   of    the    matters    pertaining      to    the

management of the company.            Mr. Sharma submitted

that in the interest of justice and in keeping with

the spirit of the order passed by this Court on 4th

January, 2008, the pending proceedings before the

DRT, Hyderabad, should be transferred to the DRT,

Jhandewalan, Delhi.





4.   Responding     to   Mr.   Sharma's     submissions,    Mr.

Rakesh   Tikku,     learned      Advocate     appearing     for

Respondent No.1 Bank, contended that in view of the

disputes among the three groups fighting for the

management of the Petitioner Company, the payment

of the dues of the Bank were being successfully

                                                                              7





avoided.     It        was     submitted          that        the     present

applications were nothing but a ploy to further

defer payment of the outstanding dues of the Bank

amounting to almost Rs.19 crores as on the date of

the hearing.       It was submitted that in the contest

relating    to    the        management      of    the        Company,      the

payment     of    the        dues    of     the     Bank       were     being

sidelined and the Bank was, therefore, willing to

abide by any order that might be passed by this

Court in the present Transfer Petitions since its

only   concern     was        to    recover       its    dues       from    the

Petitioner Company. In fact, learned counsel for

the Bank questioned the manner in which one group,

referred     to    as        the     S.K.     Agarwal          Group,      had

initiated        the         proceedings          before        the        DRT,

Hyderabad, challenging the order passed by the Bank

under Section 13(4) of the Securitization Act in

January,     2006,       after        a     delay        of     786     days.

According to learned counsel, the very situation

which this Court had wanted to avoid by its order

dated 4th January, 2008, was sought to be frustrated

                                                                         8





by the filing of the Appeal by the S.K. Agarwal

group    before     the    DRT,      Hyderabad,      while      all    the

other matters pertaining to the Company and its

management were pending in Delhi.



5.     The   petitioner's       prayer     for      transfer     of    the

pending proceedings before the DRT, Hyderabad, was,

however,     seriously       opposed     on    behalf      of    private

respondents.          It was urged by Mr. E.C. Agrawala,

learned      Advocate        appearing         for     the       private

respondents, that the proceedings before the DRT,

Hyderabad,        were    not   covered       by     the   directions

contained in the order passed by this Court on 4th

January, 2008.            Mr. Agrawala submitted that the

said order related only to suits in regard to the

management and control of the Petitioner Company.

As     far   as     the     proceedings          before      the      DRT,

Hyderabad,      are      concerned,    Mr.     Agrawala      submitted

that     they      related      to     the     recovery         of    the

outstanding dues of the Bank which the Bank was

entitled     to    initiate       before      the    Debts      Recovery

Tribunal and had nothing to do with the management

                                                                            9





of the Company as such.                    It was urged that the

proceedings before the DRT were and would have to

be treated on a different footing in relation to

the suits pending before the Delhi High Court for

the    right    to    manage    the     Company.           Mr.    Agrawala

submitted that there was, therefore, no ground made

out     on     behalf    of    the      Petitioner         Company       for

transfer       of     the     proceedings         before         the     DRT,

Hyderabad, to the DRT, Jhandewalan, Delhi.


6.     We have carefully considered the submissions

made    on     behalf   of     the    respective       parties,         and,

although,       technically          speaking        the     proceedings

before the DRT, Hyderabad, are not covered by the

directions contained in the order of 4th January,

2008,    due     weightage        has      to   be     given       to    the

intention of this Court that all matters pertaining

to the management of the Petitioner Company should

be     heard    and     decided       by    one      Court       to     avoid

conflicting judgments.               In fact, that was the very

object and purport with which all the pending civil

matters in the State of Andhra Pradesh touching the

                                                                     10





management of the Petitioner Company were directed

to be heard by the Delhi High Court exclusively. In

keeping with the above intention and purport of the

said order, it was only but reasonable that the

proceedings before the DRT, Hyderabad, should be

transferred to the DRT, Jhandewalan, Delhi, since

all    the     other     proceedings           relating       to    the

management and control of the Petitioner Company

are    being     heard      by     the        Delhi    High     Court.

Furthermore, it is the Delhi High Court which is

the appellate forum against an order of the DRT,

Delhi.       Therefore, in keeping with the spirit of

the   directions       contained         in    the    order    of   4th

January,      2008,    we   are       inclined        to    allow   the

Transfer       Petition          filed        by      M/s     Vinedale

Distilleries Ltd.



7.    The Transfer Petitions are, therefore, allowed.

Let O.A. No.29 of 2000, Dena Bank vs. M/s Vinedale

Distilleries      Ltd.      &     Ors.,       and     Securitization

Application       No.157         of      2008,        M/s     Vinedale

Distilleries Ltd. vs. Dena Bank, pending before the

                                                                                         11





Debts Recovery Tribunal, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh,

stand transferred to the Debts Recovery Tribunal,

Jhandewalan, Delhi.



8.   There will, however, be no order as to costs.



                             ...............................................................J.
                                                     (ALTAMAS KABIR)



                             ...............................................................J.
                                                              (AFTAB ALAM)


                             ...............................................................J.
                             (SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR)

New Delhi,

Dated: January 11, 2010.