C.I.T..Mumbai vs M/S.Emptee Poly-Yarn Pvt.Ltd on 20 January, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
4
, Cited by 
109
]










Top AI Tags


income-tax


definitions-of-excise-act






User Queries


slp










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


C.I.T..Mumbai vs M/S.Emptee Poly-Yarn Pvt.Ltd on 20 January, 2010


Equivalent citations: 2010 AIR SCW 895, 2010 (2) SCC 720, AIR 2010 SC (SUPP) 474, 2010 TAX. L. R. 185, (2010) 1 ORISSA LR 500, (2010) 109 CUT LT 554, (2010) 78 ALL LR 55, (2010) 1 SCALE 571


Bench: 
H.L. Dattu
, 
S.H. Kapadia


                                                              REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                CIVIL APPEAL NO.786 OF 2010
         (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.26482/2008)


C.I.T., Mumbai                                   ...Appellant(s)

          Versus

M/s. Emptee Poly-Yarn Pvt. Ltd.                  ...Respondent(s)

        With Civil Appeals Nos. 787 to 792 of 2010
 (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) Nos.4186, 10269, 21390, 2102,
                   1490 and 1582 of 2009

                           O R D E R



       Leave granted.



       Heard learned counsel on both sides.



       The short question which arises for determination

in this batch of Civil Appeals is: Whether twisting and

texturising of partially oriented yarn ('POY' for short)

amounts to 'manufacture' in terms of 
Section 80IA
 of the

Income Tax Act, 1961?



       The lead matter in this batch of Civil Appeals is

C.I.T., Mumbai Vs. M/s. Emptee Poly-Yarn Pvt. Ltd. (Civil

Appeal arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.26482/2008), in which

the relevant Assessment Year is 1996-97.


                                                     ...2/-

                                    -2-


          Repeatedly      this    Court    has      recommended       to     the

Department, be it under Excise Act, Customs Act or the


Income Tax Act
, to examine the process applicable to the

product    in    question   and    not    to   go    only    by    dictionary

meanings.       This recommendation is not being followed over

the years.       Even when the assessee gives an opinion on a

given process, the Department does not submit any counter

opinion wherever such counter opinion is possible.                         Prima

facie, however, in this case, we do no see possibility of

any counter opinion to the opinion given by the Mumbai

University, vide letter dated 10th July, 1999.


          With the above preface, we are required to examine

the above question as to whether twisting and texturising

of POY amounts to 'manufacture'.               At the outset, we wish

to clarify that our judgment should not be understood to

mean that per se twisting and texturising would constitute

'manufacture' in every case.              In each case, one has to

examine the process undertaken by the assessee.


          Having examined the process in the light of the

opinion     given    by     the    expert,       which      has     not    been

controverted, we find that POY is a semi-finished yarn not

capable of being put in warp or weft, it can only be used

for making a texturized yarn, which, in turn,                     can be used

                                                                      ...3/-

                                     -3-


 in the manufacture of fabric.             In other words, POY cannot

be used directly to manufacture fabric.                   According to the

expert,      crimps,    bulkiness        etc.   are    introduced        by     a

process, called as thermo mechanical process, into POY

which    converts      POY    into   a    texturized      yarn.      If       one

examines     this    thermo    mechanical       process    in     detail,     it

becomes      clear    that    texturising       and   twisting      of    yarn

constitutes 'manufacture' in the context of conversion of

POY into texturized yarn.                At this stage, we may also

reproduce, hereinbelow, para 10 of our judgment in the

case    of   C.I.T.    Vs.    M/s.   Oracle      Software       India    Ltd.,

reported in 2010 (1) SCALE 425.



          "The term "manufacture" implies a change, but,
          every change is not a manufacture, despite the
          fact that every change in an article is the
          result   of    a  treatment   of    labour  and
          manipulation.       However,   this    test  of
          manufacture needs to be seen in the context of
          the above process.      If an operation/process
          renders a commodity or article fit for use for
          which   it    is   otherwise   not    fit,  the
          operation/process fall6 s within the meaning of
          the word "manufacture".



          Applying the above test to the facts of this case,

it is clear that POY simplicitor is not fit for being used

in the manufacture of a fabric.                 It becomes usable only

after it undergoes the operation/process which is called

as   thermo    mechanical       process     which     converts      POY into
                                                                        ...4/-





                                         -4-


texturised       yarn,     which,        in     turn,     is     used   for      the

manufacture      of    fabric.           One    more     point    needs    to     be

mentioned.       
Under the Income Tax Act
, as amended in 2009,

the test given by this Court in M/s. Oracle Software's

case (supra) has been recognised when the definition of

the word 'manufacture' is made explicit by 
Finance Act


No.2/2009    which       states    that        'manufacture'      shall,       inter

alia, mean a change in bringing into existence of a new

and distinct object or article or thing with a different

chemical composition or integral structure.                       Applying this

definition to the facts of the present case, it may be

mentioned that the above thermo mechanical process also

bring about a structural change in the yarn itself, which

is one of the important tests to be seen while judging

whether the process is manufacture or not. The structure,

the character, the use and the name of the product are

indicia     to   be    taken      into    account        while    deciding       the

question whether the process is a manufacture or not.


          Before      concluding,        we     may     point    out    that    the

learned counsel appearing for the Department cited before

us a judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the

case   of   Commissioner          of   Central        Excise,     Mumbai-V       vs.

Swastik     Rayon     Processors, reported in 2007 (209) E.L.T.
                                                                     ...5/-





                                     -5-


163 (S.C.), in which it has been held that twisting of

cellulosic filament yarn with a blended yarn comprising of

polyester and viscose will not amount to manufacture under


Section 2(F)
 of the Central Excise Act.                    In our view, the

said    judgment     has     no    application        to    the   facts    and

circumstances of this case.                As stated above, POY is a

semi-finished product.            It is a raw material/input.             That

raw material or input gets converted into a texturised

yarn by reason of the thermo mechanical process.                       POY is

unfit for manufacture of fabric.                POY, as stated above,

means    partially      oriented       yarn     whereas       a   cellulosic

filament yarn is a final product in the sense that it can

be   used    directly   for       manufacture    of    fabric.       If   this

definition is kept in mind, the judgment in the case of

Swastik Rayon Processors's case (supra) will not apply to

the facts of the present case.



        We    once   again    repeat    the     caution      which   we   have

mentioned hereinabove.             Our judgment in the present case

is to be confined to the facts of the present case.                           We

are not saying that texturising or twisting per se in

every matter amounts to manufacture.                       It is the thermo

mechanical process embedded in twisting and texturising

when applied to a partially            oriented yarn which makes the
                                                   ...6/-





                             -6-


process a manufacture.    In the circumstances, the judgment

in the Swastik Rayon Processors's case (supra) will not

apply.



         Applying the above test to the facts of the present

case, we find no infirmity in the impugned judgments of

the High Court.     Accordingly, the Civil Appeals filed by

the Department are dismissed with no order as to costs.





                                     ..................J.
                                        (S.H. KAPADIA)


                                     ..................J.
                                        (H.L. DATTU)
New Delhi,
January 20, 2010.