Kaka @ Tilak Raj(Minor) Tr.Father & Anr vs State Of H.P. & Ors on 15 January, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
11
, Cited by 
10
]










Top AI Tags


appeal-to-supreme-court, power-to-issue-writ


wrongful-confinement


common-intention


breach-of-peace


false-evidence






User Queries


d k basu










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Kaka @ Tilak Raj(Minor) Tr.Father & Anr vs State Of H.P. & Ors on 15 January, 2010


Equivalent citations: 2010 AIR SCW 1406, 2010 (3) SCC 399, AIR 2010 SC (SUPP) 610, 2011 CRI LJ (SUPP) 850 (SC), (2010) 70 ALLCRIC 671, (2010) 1 ALLCRIR 642, (2010) 1 CHANDCRIC 219, (2010) 2 CURCRIR 3, 2010 (2) SCC (CRI) 79, (2010) 1 SCALE 464, (2010) 93 ALLINDCAS 260 (SC)


Author: 
Harjit Singh Bedi


Bench: 
J.M. Panchal
, 
Harjit Singh Bedi


                                                          [Non-Reportable]
                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                 WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO. 17 OF 2007

KAKA @ TILAK RAJ (MINOR) TR.FATHER & ANR.            ....PETITIONERS

                               VERSUS

STATE OF H.P. AND ORS.                               ...
RESPONDENTS


                          JUDGMENT



HARJIT SINGH BEDI,J.



1.   The petitioner has made the following prayers in this petition
under 
Article 32
 of the Constitution of India:

     "(a)   direct the Respondent No.1 - State of Himachal Pradesh
            to hold an independent, fair and impartial enquiry by
            the sitting Judge of the Hon'ble High Court or by the
            District Judge of the Concerned District and to submit
            report within a specific time period with regard to illegal
            detention, inhuman treatment, merciless beating by the
            respondents No. 2 to 7 on dated 16.11.2006 and
            17.11.2006;

     (b)    Award reasonable and sufficient compensation in favour
            of       the petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 for their illegal
            detention and the said compensation to be awarded
            from the personal pocket of the Respondents No.2 to 7;

     (c)    Initiate prompt and necessary departmental enquiry
            against the Respondents 2 to 7 herein for keeping the
            law of the land at bay and for creating lawlessness in
            the society by way of indulging in corrupt practice just
      to pressurize the petitioner to pay a sum of Rs.25,000/-

      to them for none of their fault.

                                          W.P (CRL.) NO. 17/2007


(d)   Requisite direction be issued to the respondent No.1 for
      lodging an FIR against the Respondent Nos.2 to 7 under
      
Section 193
, 
211
, 
341
, 
342
, 
447
, 
504
, 
506
 and 
34
 IPC
      in the concerned police station and to record the
      statement of the persons present more than 100 on the
      date of forcibly taken out the petitioners in the police
      custody by dragging from the field to the main road in
      order to ascertain the complete truth of the alleged
      illegal action of the respondents No.2 to 7 ;

(e)   The show cause notice be also given to the concerned
      Chief Medical Officer of the Government Hospital,
      Nurpur, Tehsil Nurpur as to how when the son of the
      Respondent No.8 was initially medically examined by
      the Governemt Dispensary at Fatehpur on the alleged
      date and it remained without any medical help for 4-5
      days, thereafter the report given by the concerned
      Dispensary Doctor seems to be authentic rather than
      the MLR given by the concerned Chief Medical Officer,
      Govt. Hospital, Nurpur after a prolonged time from the
      alleged   occurrence   not   only   seems   to   false   and
      fabricated documents but it is the handiwork of the
      local politicians to book the present petitioner No.2 in
      the aforesaid offences after prolonged delay and as such
      the concerned M.L.R. procured by the respondents No.2



                             2

to 7 in order to save their skin for the illegal demand
made by them on 8.9.2006;



                     3


                                                  W.P (CRL.) NO. 17/2007


 
(f)        a   contempt   proceeding    be   initiated   against   the
                responents No.2 to 7 for gross violation of the direction
                of this Hon'ble Apex Court reported in 
Dilip Kumar
                Basu Vs. State of W.B. & Ors.
 - reported in AIR 1997
                SC 3017;


     (g)        and pass such other or further order or orders as this
                Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the facts and
                circumstances of the case and in the interest of justice."



2.         We are unable to see how these prayers can be permitted to
be raised in a writ petition directly in the Supreme Court under

Article 32
 of the Constitution. Nevertheless as the learned counsel
for the petitioner has referred to certain illegal acts committed by
the respondents in violation of the directions of this Court in 
D.K.
Basu Vs. State
 [AIR 1997 SC 3017] and submitted that proceedings
pending against the petitioner in various criminal courts be
quashed, a fresh enquiry be ordered by the CBI or the District
Judge, that compensation be awarded to the petitioner and that an
FIR be lodged against respondent Nos. 2 and 4 i.e Shri Hirdu Ram,
DSP and Jog Raj, ASI as an attempt had been made by all the
respondents collectively to extort money from the petitioner we
have chosen to go into the facts of the case as well.




3.         A reply has been filed on behalf of all the respondents by the
SP Dharamshala, and it has been pointed out that enquiries had
revealed that the petitioner and his father Kashmir Singh had
beaten some persons and this fact had been found as correct



                                      4

during the course of the investigation and the two had accordingly
been arrested, but as the     petitioner was a Juvenile, he had
been sent to the Juvenile Court at Una and later, released on bail
and handed over to his uncle Vijay Kumar. It also appears that as
a consequence of an agitation by a political party, an enquiry had
been conducted by the SDJM, Jawali and he had forwarded his
Report to the higher authorities, suggesting that no further action
was required to be taken in the matter as it was under

investigation. It has further been highlighted that a charge-sheet
had been filed against the petitioner and his father and the matter
was under trial as of now. The allegations that the petitioner had
been beaten or an attempt had been made to extort money from
him or anyone else has been specifically denied.        Alongwith the
reply, an order of the Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Jawali,
District-Kangra, H.P. dated 3rd February, 2007 has also been
appended.     This order pertains to an enquiry made by the
Magistrate with regard to a reference as to whether the directions
issued by this Court in D.K. Basu and ors. had been violated.



4.    The final observations in this order are relevant and are
reproduced below:



 
"Keeping in view the entire facts and circumstances of the
     case, I am of the considered opinion that there is no
     violation of basic requirement as 
laid down in
 case 
D.K.
     Basu
 supra were infringed. Infact, the requirements are to
     be followed as a major to prevent the custodial violation. It
     is nowhere disputed by the applicant that he was subjected
     to custodial violation. Infact, this is not at all a case of



                                   5


                                             W.P (CRL.) NO. 17/2007



     custodial violation. Hence, there is no substantial merits,
     therefore, show cause notices issued to the respondents are
     hereby dropped. Be tagged with the main case."




     In this view of the matter, the judgments cited by the learned
counsel cannot come to his aid.



5.    The Writ Petition is, accordingly, dismissed, but with liberty
to the petitioner to pursue his remedies before the Criminal Courts.



                                                ..............................J.
                                               (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)




                                                ..............................J.
                                                         (J.M. PANCHAL)
NEW DELHI,
DATED: JANUARY 15, 2010.



                                  6