Sri Jeyaram Educational Trust & Ors vs A.G.Syed Mohideen & Ors on 22 January, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
13
, Cited by 
48
]










User Queries


r. v. raveendran 


principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction


jurisdiction of civil court


original jurisdiction


principal civil court 


jurisdiction of district court


section 92 suit


civil courts act


principal court of civil jurisdiction


sc 2010


district court


section 92 










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Sri Jeyaram Educational Trust & Ors vs A.G.Syed Mohideen & Ors on 22 January, 2010


Equivalent citations: AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 671, 2010 AIR SCW 871, (2010) 1 RECCIVR 875, (2010) 2 MAD LW 1, (2010) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 415, (2010) 2 CIVLJ 315, (2010) 110 REVDEC 169, (2010) 1 CURCC 200, (2010) 1 UC 514, (2010) 1 CLR 314 (SC), (2010) 1 ORISSA LR 838, (2010) 2 ALL WC 1240, (2010) 109 CUT LT 452, (2010) 78 ALL LR 904, (2010) 2 MAD LJ 801, (2010) 2 JCR 20 (SC), (2010) 1 KER LT 425, (2010) 2 ICC 260, 2010 (1) SCALE 561, 2010 (2) SCC 513, (2010) 1 CIVILCOURTC 648, (2010) 1 ALL RENTCAS 362, (2010) 1 SCALE 561


Author: 
R.V.Raveendran


Bench: 
K S Radhakrishnan
, 
R V Raveendran


                                                                           Reportable
                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 852 OF 2010
               (Arising out of SLP (C) No.22962 of 2008)


Sri Jeyaram Educational Trust & Ors.                       ... Appellants

Vs.

A.G.Syed Mohideen & Ors.                               ... Respondents


                            JUDGMENT



R.V.RAVEENDRAN, J.





      Leave granted.     Heard learned counsel for the appellants and

respondents. We have also heard the learned counsel for the State of

Tamil Nadu and Registrar General of the Madras High Court to whom

notices had been issued in regard to the interpretation of 
section 92
 of the

Code of Civil Procedure (`Code' for short), with reference to the State

Government Notification No. GOM No.727 dated 8.3.1960.




2.    The respondents instituted a suit (OS No. 13 of 2006) on the file of

the Principal District Judge, Cuddalore against the appellants under


Section 92
 of Code, seeking a direction to the second appellant to repay

                                     2



all the amounts spent by him after 20.6.2005 contrary to the terms of the

supplementary deed of Trust, and also to convene the Trust meeting for

approval of the income and expenditure and other consequential reliefs.




3.    Appellants 2 to 4 herein filed a memo before the District Court

stating that having regard to the decision of the Madras High Court in 
P.

S. Subramanian v. K. L. Lakshmanan
 - 2007 (5) Mad. L.J. 921, the court

did not have jurisdiction to entertain any suit under 
section 92
 of the

Code and therefore the suit may be transferred to the file of the Principal

Subordinate Judge, Cuddalore. The learned District Judge rejected the

said memo by order dated 1.8.2007 holding that he had jurisdiction to

entertain the suit, as the value of the suit was Rs.10 lakhs. The revision

filed by the appellants, challenging the said order of the District Court,

was dismissed by the Madras High Court by the impugned order dated

25.4.2008. The said judgment is challenged in this appeal by special

leave. The only question that arises for consideration in this appeal is

whether a District Court in the State of Tamil Nadu, does not have

jurisdiction to try a suit under 
section 92
 of the Code.


                                           3


4.     
Section 92
 relates to public charities. It enables a suit being filed in

the case of any alleged breach of any express or constructive Trust

created for public purposes of a charitable or religious nature, `in the

Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction or in any other Court

empowered in that behalf by the State Government within the local limits

of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the subject-matter of the

Trust is situate'.




4.1) 
Section 2(4)
 of the Code extracted below, while defining the term

`district', in effect defines the terms `district court' :


       "2(4).                 `district' means the local limits of the
       jurisdiction of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction
       (hereinafter called a "District Court"), and includes the local limits of
       the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of a High Court."


4.2) 
Section 9
 of the Code provides that the courts shall (subject to the

provisions of the Code) have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature

excepting suits of which their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly

barred.    
Sections 15
 to 
19
 of the Code deal with place of suing.

Section 15 requires every suit to be instituted in the court of the lowest

grade competent to try it.

                                          4



4.3) 
Section 6
 of the Code deals with pecuniary jurisdiction and

provides as follows :



         "6. Pecuniary jurisdiction : Save in so far as is otherwise expressly
         provided, nothing herein contained shall operate to give any Court
         jurisdiction over suits the amount or value of the subject-matter of
         which exceeds the pecuniary limits (if any) of its ordinary
         jurisdiction."



4.4) 
Section 10
 of the Tamil Nadu Civil Courts Act, 1873 (for short

`
Civil Courts Act
') empowers the state government to fix, and from time

to time vary, the local limits of the jurisdiction of any District Court or

Sub-ordinate Judge's court under that Act. 
Section 12
 of the Civil Courts

Act (as amended by Amendment Act No.1 of 2004), deals with the

jurisdiction of the District Judge and the Subordinate Judge is extracted

below:



      "12.                   The jurisdiction of a District Judge extends,
      subject to the rules contained in 
the Code of Civil Procedure
, to all
      original suits and proceedings of a civil nature, of which the amount
      or value of the subject matter exceeds five lakh rupees. The
      jurisdiction of a Sub-ordinate Judge extends, subject to the rules
      contained in 
the Code of Civil Procedure
, to all like original suits
      and proceedings, of which the amount or value of the subject matter
      exceeds one lakh rupees but does not exceed five lakh rupees."



4.5) By a notification dated 8.3.1960 issued in exercise of power under

section 92(1) of the Code, in supersession of the Judicial Department

Notification No.719 dated 17.10.1910, the Governor of Madras invested

                                    5



all courts of Subordinate Judges in the State of Madras with jurisdiction

under the Code in respect of suits relating to Trusts created for public

purposes of a charitable and religious nature.





5.    The appellants submit that on a true interpretation of section 92 of

the Code, the District Court as the Principal Civil Court of original

jurisdiction in a district had jurisdiction to try suits relating to public

Trusts till 8.3.1960, having regard to the provisions of section 92 of the

Code; and that once the State Government issues a notification in

exercise of power under section 92 empowering courts of the Sub-

ordinate Judges to entertain suits under section 92, the District Court

ceased to have jurisdiction to try suits under the said section. 
In support

of their contention, they strongly relied upon the decision of a learned

Single Judge in the case of 
P.S. Subramanian
 (supra) wherein it was held

that the word "or" occurring between the words "may institute a suit in

the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction" and "in any other court

empowered in that behalf by the State Government" in section 92 of the

Code, should have to be read as substitutive and not as disjunctive or

alternative.


                                      6


6.    It is now well settled that a provision of a statute should have to be

read as it is, in a natural manner, plain and straight, without adding,

substituting or omitting any words. While doing so, the words used in the

provision should be assigned and ascribed their natural, ordinary or

popular meaning. Only when such plain and straight reading, or ascribing

the natural and normal meaning to the words on such reading, leads to

ambiguity, vagueness, uncertainty, or absurdity which were not obviously

intended by the Legislature or the Lawmaker, a court should open its

interpretation tool kit containing the settled rules of construction and

interpretation, to arrive at the true meaning of the provision. While using

the tools of interpretation, the court should remember that it is not the

author of the Statute who is empowered to amend, substitute or delete, so

as to change the structure and contents. A court as an interpreter cannot

alter or amend the law. It can only interpret the provision, to make it

meaningful and workable so as to achieve the legislative object, when

there is vagueness, ambiguity or absurdity. The purpose of interpretation

is not to make a provision what the Judge thinks it should be, but to make

it what the legislature intended it to be.

                                     7


7.      Section 92 provides that a suit under that section can be instituted

"in the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction or in any other court

empowered in that behalf by the State Government". When it is read in a

normal manner, it means that the suits under section 92 should be filed in

the district court or in the sub-ordinate court. When the language is clear

and unambiguous and when there is no need to apply the tools of

interpretation, there is no need to interpret the word `or', nor any need to

read it as a substitutive word, instead of its plain and simple meaning

denoting an `alternative'.





8.      Assuming that there was any need for applying the principles of

interpretation, let us next consider whether the word `or' was used in

section 92 of the Code in a substitutive sense. It is clear from section 92

of the Code that the legislature did not want to go by the general rule

contained in section 15 of the Code that every suit shall be instituted in

the court of the lowest grade competent to try it, in regard to suits relating

to public Trusts. The intention of the law makers was that such suits

should be tried by the District Court. At the same time, the law makers

contemplated that if there was heavy work load on the District Court, the

State Government should be enabled to empower any other court (within

                                          8



the local limits of whose jurisdiction, the whole or any part of the subject

matter is situate), also to entertain such suits. Therefore, the word "or" is

used in the ordinary and normal sense, that is to denote an alternative,

giving a choice. The provisions of section 92 do not give room for

interpreting the word "or" as a substitutive, so as to lead to an

interpretation that when the Government notified any other court, such

notified court alone will have jurisdiction and not the District Court. If

the intention was to substitute the Court empowered by the State

Government in place of the Principal Civil Court of Original jurisdiction,

instead of the words `may institute a suit in the Principal Civil Court of

original jurisdiction or in any other court empowered in that behalf by the

State Government', the following words would have been used in the

section :





        `may institute a suit in the principal Civil Court of original
        jurisdiction, or when any other court is empowered in that behalf
        by the State Government, then in such court empowered by the
        state government,'

                                         OR

        `may institute a suit in the court notified by the state government.'

                                    9


9.    The provisions of 
section 12
 of the Civil Courts Act specifying the

pecuniary limits of District Courts and Sub-ordinate Courts, is subject to

the provisions 
of the Code of Civil Procedure
. In view of the express

provisions of section 92 specifying the courts which will have jurisdiction

to entertain suits under that section, neither the provisions of sections 15

to 20 of the Code nor the provisions of 
section 12
 of the Civil Courts Act

will apply to such suits. Section 92 is a self contained provision, and

conferment of jurisdiction in regard to suits under that section does not

depend upon the value of the subject matter of the suit. Therefore, insofar

as the suits under section 92 are concerned, the District Courts and Sub-

ordinate Courts will have concurrent jurisdiction without reference to any

pecuniary limits. We find that the learned District Judge had held that he

had jurisdiction because the value of the subject matter was Rs.10 lakhs,

apparently keeping in view, 
section 12
 of the Civil Courts Act. We make

it clear that the pecuniary limits mentioned in 
section 12
 of the Civil

Courts Act, do not apply to suits under section 92 of the Code. In fact, if


section 12
 of the Civil Courts Act is applied to decide the jurisdiction of

courts with reference to suits under section 92 of the Code, it will then

lead to the following anomalous position: The District Court will have

jurisdiction if the value of the subject matter exceeds Rs.5 lakhs. The

                                   10



Sub-ordinate Court will have jurisdiction where the value of the subject

matter exceeds Rs.1 lakh but does not exceed to Rs.5 lakhs. That would

mean that a suit under section 92 of the Code, where the subject matter

does not exceeds Rs.1 lakh, cannot be filed in any court as section 92

confers jurisdiction only on District Court and Sub-ordinate Courts. This

obviously was not intended. Be that as it may.





10.   We do not therefore approve the decision of the learned Single

Judge of the Madras High Court in PS Subramanian which ignores the

earlier decisions of that court and decisions of other High Courts which

have consistently taken the view that where jurisdiction is also conferred

on any other court by the state government by a notification (under

section 92 of the Code or under any similar provision), then that court

and the District Court will have concurrent jurisdiction. We may in this

behalf refer to the decisions in 
Annamalai vs. Slaiyappa
 - AIR 1935 Mad.


983, 
Dakor Temple Committee vs. Shankerlal
 - AIR 1944 Bom.
 
300, 
R.

Rama Subbarayalu Reddiar vs. Rengammal
 - AIR 1962 Madras 450, and

Pazhukkamattom Devaswom vs. Lakshmi Kutty Amma - 1980 Kerala

LT 645.


                                    11


11.   In view of the above, the appeal is dismissed. The learned District

Judge will proceed to decide the suit expeditiously.





                                             ____________________J.

                                             (R V Raveendran)



New Delhi;                                   ____________________J.
January 22, 2010.                            (K S Radhakrishnan)