Union Of India & Ors vs S.Vettu Perumal on 25 January, 2010








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
1
, Cited by 
0
]










Top AI Tags


equality-before-law


equal-opportunity


recruitment-and-conditions-of-service


order-enforcement


appeal-high-court < writ-petition-high-court






User Queries


absorption


 contract basis


telegram










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Union Of India & Ors vs S.Vettu Perumal on 25 January, 2010


Bench: 
K.S. Radhakrishnan
, 
R.V. Raveendran


                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 963 OF 2010
           [Arising out of SLP(C) No.11095/2009]

UNION OF INDIA & ORS                         .......APPELLANT(S)

                                    Versus

S. VETTU PERUMAL                             .....RESPONDENT(S)


                         O R D E R



              Leave granted.    Heard the parties.



2.            The respondent was provisionally appointed as

Extra Departmental Messenger in the Telegraph branch ofPost

Office, Nazareth on 8.1.1996.     When the Telecom Centre was

opened at Nazareth on 16.8.1996, the respondent was engaged

as a Coolie Messenger on contract basis and charges were

paid to him for delivery of telegrams on hourly basis at

the rates prescribed by the Department.      He was neither an

employee on full-time basis nor on a salary or daily wages.

The respondent continued as Coolie Messenger on contract

basis for nearly a decade.





3.            On 21.3.2006, a notification was issued by

the BSNL inviting bids for delivery of telegrams on work

contract basis. The respondent submitted his bid of Rs.10/-

per delivery of telegram.       The appellant found that the

charges for delivery of telegram nearby Tuticorin was only

Rs.3/- per telegram and compared to it the quotation of
respondent

             .....2.

                                        - 2 -





was   very     high.        He     was,     therefore,         invited         for   a

negotiation.        He     did    not    turn    up.       The    contract       was,

therefore, awarded to someone else.                 Feeling aggrieved, the

respondent filed a writ petition in the Madras High Court

for quashing the tender notification dated 21.3.2006 and

for a direction to the Department to 'reinstate' him with

all consequential benefits.





4.                 A   learned      single       Judge   of      the    High    Court

allowed      the    said    petition        by     order      dated      25.1.2007

(modified on 7.6.2007) directing the appellants to consider

the case of the respondent by absorption in any future

vacancy.      Feeling aggrieved, the appellants filed a writ

appeal which was dismissed by the Division Bench of the

High Court on 1.12.2008.                The said order is challenged in

this appeal by special leave.





5.                 The learned single Judge has categorically

recorded a finding that the respondent was working only on

contract basis and payment was made on hourly basis.                                 If

that is so, the respondent could not be considered as an

'employee' either on daily-wage or a salary. In fact, the

respondent participated in the tender process where he was

required     to    quote    the    minimum       charges      for      delivery      of
telegrams and

                ......3.

                             - 3 -





only when his bid was not accepted, he chose to approach

the High Court praying for absorption.          Having regard to

the principles laid down in 
Secretary, State of Karnataka

Vs. Umadevi
, (2006) 4 SCC 1, the question of directing

regularisation or absorption of Coolie Messenger working on

contract basis paid on hourly basis does not arise.


6.             Therefore, we allow this appeal, set aside

the impugned orders of the learned single Judge affirmed by

the Division Bench.     This will not come in the way of

respondent   participating   in    future   tender   processes   or

being considered under any scheme.





                                     .........................J.
                                          ( R.V. RAVEENDRAN )



New Delhi;                        .........................J.
January 25, 2010.                   ( K.S. RADHAKRISHNAN )