Surendra Mishra vs State Of Jharkhand on 6 January, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
12
, Cited by 
62
]










Top AI Tags


murder


punishment-for-using-arms


burden-of-proving-exception-in-criminal-cases


indian-penal-code






User Queries


schizophrenia


section 84 ipc


medical insanity


legal insanity


arms act


insane


general exceptions


section 84 Indian penal code


unsound mind


section 84, IPC, indian penal code


paranoid


"unsound mind"


Contrary to law


act done


preponderance


section 84 


prescription


 behaviour


"arms act"


section 27










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Surendra Mishra vs State Of Jharkhand on 6 January, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 627, (2011) 1 MAD LJ(CRI) 776, 2011 AIR SCW 458, 2011 (2) AIR JHAR R 717, 2011 CRI. L. J. 1161, AIR 2011 SC (CRIMINAL) 254, 2011 (1) AIR KANT HCR 841, 2011 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 221, (2011) 48 OCR 495, (2011) 1 ALLCRIR 356, (2011) 1 CRIMES 192, (2011) 2 PAT LJR 29, 2011 (11) SCC 495, (2011) 1 MADLW(CRI) 408, (2011) 1 KER LJ 412, (2011) 2 RAJ LW 1410, (2011) 1 SCALE 124, (2011) 1 CRILR(RAJ) 221, (2011) 1 RECCRIR 416, 2011 ALLMR(CRI) 623, (2011) 98 ALLINDCAS 47 (SC), 2011 CRILR(SC&MP) 221, (2011) 1 CURCRIR 192, (2011) 1 JCR 219 (SC), (2011) 1 DLT(CRL) 92, (2011) 72 ALLCRIC 679, (2011) 1 CAL LJ 147, (2011) 1 CHANDCRIC 214, 2011 (3) SCC (CRI) 232, 2011 (1) GLR NOC 3 (SC), 2011 (1) KLT SN 39 (SC), 2011 (2) KCCR SN 78 (SC)


Author: 
Chandramauli Kr. Prasad


Bench: 
Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
, 
P. Sathasivam
, 
Harjit Singh Bedi


                                                          REPORTABLE

             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.177 OF 2006


SURENDERA MISHRA                            .... APPELLANT

                          VERSUS

STATE OF JHARKHAND                         ..... RESPONDENT



                      JUDGMENT



CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD, J.



1.    Sole appellant was put on trial for commission of the

offence under 
Section 302
 of the Indian Penal Code as also


Section 27
 of the Arms Act. The trial court held him guilty on

both the counts and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment

for life under 
Section 302
 of the Indian Penal Code but no

separate sentence was awarded under 
Section 27
 of the Arms

Act. His conviction and sentence has been upheld by the High

Court in appeal and hence the appellant is before us with the

leave of the Court.

                              2


2.   According to the prosecution, on 11th of August, 2000 the

deceased Chandrashekhar Choubey was going in a car driven

by PW.1, Vidyut Kumar Modi and when reached Chas Nala

crossing, he asked the driver to stop the car and call Shasdhar

Mukherjee (PW.2), the owner of Sulekha Auto Parts. As

directed, the driver called said Shasdhar Mukherjee and the

deceased started talking to him from inside the car. According

to the prosecution all of a sudden the appellant, the owner of

the Medical Hall came there with a country-made pistol,

pushed Shasdhar Mukherjee aside and fired at point-blank

range at the deceased. The driver fled away from the place of

occurrence and informed the family members of the deceased,

leaving the deceased in the car itself. PW.4, Vinod Kumar

Choubey along with the driver came back and rushed the

deceased to the Chas Nala Colliery Hospital, where he was

declared dead. On the basis of the aforesaid report a case

under 
Section 302
 of the Indian Penal Code and 
Section 27
 of

the Arms Act was registered against the appellant. After usual

investigation police submitted the charge-sheet and ultimately

      the appellant was put on trial for commission of the

                               3



offence under 
Section 302
 of the Indian Penal Code and


Section 27
 of the Arms Act.



3.   In order to bring home the charge the prosecution

altogether examined nine witnesses besides a large number of

documents were exhibited. Only plea of the appellant during

the trial was that by virtue of unsoundness of mind, the act

done by him comes within general exception under 
Section 84


of the Indian Penal Code and, therefore, he cannot be held

guilty for the act done by him. The aforesaid plea did not find

favour with the trial court as also by the High Court, in

appeal. In this connection the High Court has observed as

follows:



     "On the basis of the evidence, adduced on behalf of
     both the parties regarding mental status of accused
     Surendra Mishra, learned court below came to a
     safe conclusion that accused was not suffering from
     mental instability even prior to the incident or at the
     time of incident. I also find no ground to differ with
     such finding.



          I have noticed the observations of the learned
     court below that although some evidence were
     placed by the defence in support of the mental
     trouble of the accused, in absence of specific finding
     by the doctor or degree and nature of mental
     trouble, it can not be relied upon to declare the
     accused Surendra Mishra mentally unfit or that he
     was insane at the time of occurrence."

                              4


4.   Mr. Tanmaya Agarwal, learned Counsel appearing

on behalf of the appellant submits that the appellant

being a person of unsound mind at the time of the

commission of the offence, his act comes within general

exception as provided under 
Section 84
 of the Indian

Penal Code and hence the appellant deserves to be

acquitted. 
In support of the submission he has placed

reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case of 
State

of Punjab v. Mohinder Singh
, (1983) 2 SCC 274,          in

which it has been held as follows:




     "The doctor had examined accused a little
     before as also a little after the occurrence and
     he was found insane. The detailed reasons
     given by both Dr. Harbans Lal and Dr.
     Ramkumar have been corroborated by each
     other. From the evidence also it is clear that
     he was talking in a very unusual manner
     saying things to the effect that he had seen
     Lord Shiva in front of him and the alike. It
     cannot be said that the finding of the High
     Court was wrong.            In view of these
     circumstances we are not in a position to take
     a different view particularly when the appellant
     was suffering from schizophrenia."



5.   Another decision of this Court on which reliance

has been placed is in the case of 
Shrikant Anandrao

Bhosale v. State of Maharashtra
, (2002) 7 SCC 748,

                               5



and our attention has been drawn to the following

passage from paragraph 20 of the judgment:




     "In the present case, however, it is not only the
     aforesaid facts but it is the totality of the
     circumstances seen in the light of the evidence on
     record to prove that the appellant was suffering
     from paranoid schizophrenia. The unsoundness of
     mind before and after the incident is a relevant fact.
     From the circumstances of the case clearly an
     inference can be reasonably drawn that the
     appellant was under a delusion at the relevant time.
     He was under an attack of the ailment. The anger
     theory on which reliance has been placed is not
     ruled out under schizophrenia attack. Having
     regard to the nature of burden on the appellant, we
     are of the view that the appellant has proved the
     existence of circumstances as required by 
Section
     105
 of the Evidence Act so as to get the benefit of
     
Section 84
 IPC. We are unable to hold that the
     crime was committed as a result of an extreme fit of
     anger. There is a reasonable doubt that at the time
     of commission of the crime, the appellant was
     incapable of knowing the nature of the act by
     reason of unsoundness of mind and, thus, he is
     entitled to the benefit of 
Section 84
 IPC. Hence, the
     conviction and sentence of the appellant cannot be
     sustained."



6.   Nobody had appeared on behalf of the respondent.

However, we have perused the records and bestowed our

consideration to the submission advanced by Mr. Agarwal and

we do not find any substance in the same. In view of the plea

raised it is desirable to consider the meaning of the expression

"unsoundness of mind" in the context of 
Section 84
 of the

Indian Penal Code and for its appreciation, we deem it

expedient to reproduce the same. It reads as follows:

                                 6


     "84. Act of a person of unsound mind.--
     Nothing is an offence which is done by a
     person who, at the time of doing it, by reason
     of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of
     knowing the nature of the act, or that he is
     doing what is either wrong or contrary to law."



Section 84
 of the Indian Penal Code is found in its Chapter IV,

which deals with general exceptions.





7. From a plain reading of the aforesaid provision it is evident

  that an act will not be an offence, if done by a person who,

  at the time of doing the same by reason of unsoundness of

  mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or what

  he is doing is either wrong or contrary to law. But what is

  unsoundness of mind? This Court had the occasion to

  consider this question in the case of Bapu alias 
Gujraj

  Singh v. State of Rajasthan
, (2007) 8 SCC 66, in which

  it has been held as follows:




        "The standard to be applied is whether
     according to the ordinary standard, adopted by
     reasonable men, the act was right or wrong.
     The mere fact that an accused is conceited,
     odd, irascible and his brain is not quite all
     right, or that the physical and mental ailments
     from which he suffered had rendered his
     intellect weak and had affected his emotions
     and will, or that he had committed certain
     unusual acts in the past, or that he was liable
     to recurring fits of insanity at short intervals,
     or that he was subject to getting epileptic fits
     but there was nothing abnormal in his
     behaviour, or that his behaviour was queer,

                                7


     cannot be sufficient to attract the application
     of this section."



8.   The scope and ambit of the 
Section 84
 of the Indian

Penal Code also came up for consideration before this Court in

the case of 
Hari Singh Gond v. State of Madhya Pradesh
,

(2008) 16 SCC 109 = AIR 2009 SC 31 in which it has been

held as follows:




     "Section 84 lays down the legal test of responsibility
     in cases of alleged unsoundness of mind. There is
     no definition of `unsoundness of mind' in 
IPC
. The
     courts have, however, mainly treated this
     expression as equivalent to insanity. But the term
     `insanity' itself has no precise definition. It is a term
     used to describe varying degrees of mental disorder.
     So, every person, who is mentally diseased, is not
     ipso facto exempted from criminal responsibility. A
     distinction is to be made between legal insanity and
     medical insanity. A court is concerned with legal
     insanity, and not with medical insanity."



9.   In our opinion, an accused who seeks exoneration from

liability of an act under 
Section 84
 of the Indian Penal Code is

to prove legal insanity and not medical insanity. Expression

"unsoundness of mind" has not been defined in the 
Indian

Penal Code
 and it has mainly been treated as equivalent to

insanity. But the term insanity carries different meaning in

different contexts and describes varying degrees of mental

                               8



disorder. Every person who is suffering from mental disease is

not ipso facto exempted from criminal liability. The mere fact

that the accused is conceited, odd, irascible and his brain is

not quite all right, or that the physical and mental ailments

from which he suffered had rendered his intellect weak and

affected his emotions or indulges in certain unusual acts, or

had fits of insanity at short intervals or that he was subject to

epileptic fits and there was abnormal behaviour or the

behaviour is queer are not sufficient to attract the application

of 
Section 84
 of the Indian Penal Code.



10.   Next question which needs consideration is as to on

whom the onus lies to prove unsoundness of mind. In law,

the presumption is that every person is sane to the extent that

he knows the natural consequences of his act. The burden of

proof in the face of 
Section 105
 of the Evidence Act is on the

accused. Though the burden is on the accused but he is not

required to prove the same beyond all reasonable doubt, but

merely satisfy the preponderance of probabilities. The onus

has to be discharged by producing evidence as to the conduct

of the accused prior to the offence, his conduct at the time or

immediately after the offence with reference to his medical

                               9



condition by production of medical evidence and other relevant

factors. 
Even if the accused establishes unsoundness of mind,


Section 84
 of the Indian Penal Code will not come to its

rescue, in case it is found that the accused knew that what he

was doing was wrong or that it was contrary to law. In order to

ascertain that, it is imperative to take into consideration the

circumstances and the behaviour preceding, attending and

following the crime. Behaviour of an accused pertaining to a

desire for concealment of the weapon of offence and conduct to

avoid detection of crime go a long way to ascertain as to

whether, he knew the consequences of the act done by him.

Reference in this connection can be made to a decision of this

Court in the case of 
T.N.          Lakshmaiah     v.   State   of

Karnataka
, (2002) 1 SCC 219, in which it has been held as

follows:




        "9. 
Under the Evidence Act
, the onus of proving
     any of the exceptions mentioned in the Chapter lies
     on the accused though the requisite standard of
     proof is not the same as expected from the
     prosecution. It is sufficient if an accused is able to
     bring his case within the ambit of any of the general
     exceptions by the standard of preponderance of
     probabilities, as a result of which he may succeed
     not because that he proves his case to the hilt but
     because the version given by him casts a doubt on
     the prosecution case.

                                10


         10. 
In 
State of M.P. v. Ahmadull
,AIR 1961 SC
      998, this Court held that the burden of proof that
      the mental condition of the accused was, at the
      crucial point of time, such as is described by the
      section, lies on the accused who claims the benefit
      of this exemption vide 
Section 105
 of the Evidence
      Act [Illustration (a)]. The settled position of law is
      that every man is presumed to be sane and to
      possess a sufficient degree of reason to be
      responsible for his acts unless the contrary is
      proved.
 Mere ipse dixit of the accused is not enough
      for availing of the benefit of the exceptions under
      Chapter IV.



         11. In a case where the exception under 
Section
      84
 of the Indian Penal Code is claimed, the court
      has to consider whether, at the time of commission
      of the offence, the accused, by reason of
      unsoundness of mind, was incapable of knowing the
      nature of the act or that he is doing what is either
      wrong or contrary to law. The entire conduct of the
      accused, from the time of the commission of the
      offence up to the time the sessions proceedings
      commenced, is relevant for the purpose of
      ascertaining as to whether plea raised was genuine,
      bona fide or an afterthought."



11.   In the background of what we have observed above, we

proceed to consider the facts of the present case.      The first

evidence in regard to the unsoundness of mind as brought by

the appellant is the medical prescription dated 18th October,

1987 (Ext. A-1) in which symptom of the appellant has been

noted as psychiatric with paranoid features and medicine was

advised for sleep. Other prescriptions are dated 9th January,

1988 (Ext. A) and 5th of September 1998 in which only

medicines have been prescribed. Other prescriptions (Exts. A-

                              11



5 to A-7) also do not spell out the disease the appellant was

suffering but give the names of the medicines, he was advised

to take. The occurrence had taken place on 11th of August

2000. From these prescriptions, the only inference one can

draw is that the appellant had paranoid feeling but that too

was not proximate to the date of occurrence.      It has to be

borne in mind that to establish that acts done are not offence

and come within general exception it is required to be proved

that at the time of commission of the act, accused by reason of

unsoundness of mind was incapable of knowing that his acts

were wrong or contrary to law.       In the present case the

prosecution has proved beyond all reasonable doubt that

immediately after the appellant had shot- dead the deceased,

threatened his driver PW.1, Vidyut Kumar Modi of dire

consequences. Not only that, he ran away from the place of

occurrence and threw the country-made pistol, the weapon of

crime, in the well in order to conceal himself from the crime.

However, it was recovered later on. The aforesaid conduct of

the appellant subsequent to the commission of the offence

clearly goes to suggest that he knew that whatever he had

done was wrong and illegal. Further, he was running a

                                    12



medical shop and came to the place of occurrence and shot

dead the deceased. Had the appellant been a person of

unsound mind, it may not have been possible for him to run a

medical shop. We are of the opinion that the appellant though

suffered from certain mental instability even before and after

the incident but from that one cannot infer on a balance of

preponderance of probabilities that the appellant at the time of

the commission of the offence did not know the nature of his

act; that it was either wrong or contrary to law.             In our

opinion, the plea of the appellant does not come within the

exception contemplated under 
Section 84
 of the Indian Penal

Code.



12.   As regards the decisions of this Court in the cases of


Mohinder Singh
 (supra) and 
Shrikant Anandrao Bhosale


(supra),   relied   on   by   the    appellant   same   are   clearly

distinguishable. In those decisions, this Court on fact found

that the accused at the time of commission of crime was

suffering from Schizophrenia and in that background held that

accused is entitled to the protection under 
Section 84
 of the

Indian Penal Code. Here on fact, we have found that the

appellant was not suffering from unsoundness of mind at the

                               13



time of commission of the crime and therefore the decisions

relied on in no way advance the case of the appellant.


13.   We do not find any merit in the appeal and it is

dismissed accordingly.





                            ................................................J
                            [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]


                            ................................................J
                               [P. SATHASIVAM]


                            ................................................J
                              [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]
NEW DELHI
JANUARY 6, 2011.