Bachchu Singh vs State Of U.P. & Ors on 3 January, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
0
, Cited by 
2
]










User Queries


dispossession


agra development authority


 illegality










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Bachchu Singh vs State Of U.P. & Ors on 3 January, 2011


Bench: 
A.K. Patnaik
, 
R.V. Raveendran


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA



                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.23 OF 2011

                 [Arising out of SLP(C) No.144/2010]





  Bachchu Singh                                       .......Appellant 




                                           Versus




  State of UP & Ors.                                  .....Respondents 





                                 O R D E R



      Leave granted.  



2.    Agra Development Authority, the fourth respondent herein, 



allotted   a   house   to   the   sixth   respondent   and   delivered 



possession to her on 18.9.1986. 



3.    The   sixth   respondent   filed   a   writ   petition   in   the   year 



2003 alleging that the appellant herein had illegally occupied 



the   said   house   and,   seeking   a   direction   to   the   respondents   1 



to   4   herein   (State   of   UP,   District   Magistrate,   Agra, 



Superintendent   of   Police,   Agra   and   the   Agra   Development 



Authority)   to   evict   the   appellant   from   the   house   and   deliver 



vacant   possession   to   her.   The   said   writ   petition   was   allowed 



                                      2




by   Division   Bench   of   the   Allahabad   High   Court   by   impugned 



order   dated   25.11.2009.   The   High   Court   has   not   considered 



either   the   facts   or   the   legal   position.   By   a   brief   order,   it 



narrates   the   aforesaid   grievance   of   the   sixth   respondent   that 



the   appellant   had   trespassed   into   her   house   and   consequently, 



directs the Collector, Agra to look into the matter personally 



and   if   the   appellant   herein   is   found   to   be   a   trespasser,   to 



"throw   him   out"   from   the   house   within   a   period   of   one   month 



provided   there   is   no   legal   hurdle.   The   said   order   is 



challenged by the appellant in this appeal by special leave. 



4.    The   appellant   alleges   that   the   sixth   respondent   had 



agreed   to   sell   the   said   property   in   his   favour   in   the   year 



1992   and   in   pursuance   of   the   said   agreement,   had   delivered 



possession;   that   the   sixth   respondent   did   not   perform   the 



contract   and   the   appellant   raised   the   dispute   which   was 



referred   to   arbitration   and   the   Arbitrator   has   made   an   award 



dated   14.5.1996   which   was   made   a   rule   of   the   Court   on 



29.1.1999;   that   the   execution   proceedings   initiated   by   the 



appellant for obtaining a sale deed in pursuance of such award 



is   pending;   and   that   therefore,   the   question   of   High   Court 



issuing   a   direction   to   the   Collector   to   evict   him   does   not 



arise. 



                                      3


5.    The  sixth  respondent  on  the  other  hand  contends  that  she 



had not entered into any agreement of sale with the appellant 



and   alleges   that   she   did   not   deliver   possession   to   the 



appellant.   According   to   her,   the   appellant   having   forcibly 



taken   possession,   has   created   documents   to   show   an   agreement 



of   sale   and   the   award   made   is   illegal   and   liable   to   be   set 



aside. Be that as it may. 



6.    If the appellant had illegally encroached or dispossessed 



the   sixth   respondent,   the   appropriate   course   for   the   sixth 



respondent   was   to   file   a   suit   or   have   recourse   to   such   other 



remedies   as   may   be   open   to   her   in   law.   The   fourth   respondent 



(the   Agra   Development   Authority)   having   delivered   possession 



of   the   property   to   the   sixth   respondent   on   18.8.1986,   any 



subsequent   alleged   dispossession   of   the   sixth   respondent   by 



any   third   party,   will   not   give   any   cause   of   action   for   the 



sixth   respondent   to   seek   a   direction   to   either   the   Agra 



Development   Authority   or   the   State   Government   or   its 



authorities   to   evict   such   person   who   allegedly   dispossessed 



the sixth respondent. 



7.    In   view   of   the   above,   this   appeal   is   allowed,   the   order 



of the High Court is set aside, the writ petition is dismissed 



without   prejudice   to   the   rights   of   the   sixth   respondent   to 



                                    4




take   such   action   as   is   available   to   her   in   law   to   secure 



possession   of   the   house,   if   she   has   been   dispossessed 



illegally. 






                                                 .....................J.

                                                 ( R.V. RAVEENDRAN )





New Delhi;                                       ....................J.

January 03, 2011.                                ( A.K. PATNAIK )