Jagpal Singh & Ors vs State Of Punjab & Ors on 28 January, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
9
, Cited by 
964
]










User Queries


land of gram sabha


encroachment as is where is


markandey katju


revenue records


unauthorized occupant


land and common land


gram panchayat


land record


jagir


"markandey katju"


pond 


village land


scheduled cast


tribes










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Jagpal Singh & Ors vs State Of Punjab & Ors on 28 January, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 1123, 2012 AIR SCW 2574, (2011) 99 ALLINDCAS 88 (SC), 2011 AIR SCW 990, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 1453, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 492, (2011) 1 CURCC 144, (2011) 3 MAD LW 17, (2011) 1 ORISSA LR 940, (2016) 3 PAT LJR 268, (2011) 2 RAJ LW 1389, 2011 (11) SCC 396, (2011) 1 RECCIVR 912, (2011) 1 ICC 742, (2011) 2 SCALE 42, (2016) 3 JLJR 321, (2011) 85 ALL LR 500, (2011) 3 ALL WC 2379, (2011) 2 GUJ LR 1304, (2011) 3 MAD LJ 760, (2011) 2 JCR 52 (SC), (2011) 112 CUT LT 130, (2011) 1 LANDLR 61, (2011) 113 REVDEC 329, (2011) 1 CLR 554 (SC), 2011 (1) KLT SN 97 (SC), 2011 (86) ALR SOC 49 (SC)


Author: 
Markandey Katju


Bench: 
Markandey Katju
, 
Gyan Sudha Misra


                                                                    REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



           CIVIL APPEAL NO.1132 /2011 @ SLP(C) No.3109/2011
     (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) CC No. 19869 of 2010)


Jagpal Singh & Ors.                                 ..   Appellant (s)

        -versus-

State of Punjab & Ors.                              ..   Respondent (s)




                              JUDGMENT



Markandey Katju, J.





1.      Leave granted.





2.      Heard learned counsel for the appellants.





3.      Since time immemorial there have been common lands inhering in the

village communities in India, variously called gram sabha land, gram

panchayat land, (in many North Indian States), shamlat deh (in Punjab etc.),

                                                                             2



mandaveli and poramboke land (in South India), Kalam, Maidan, etc.,

depending on the nature of user. These public utility lands in the villages

were for centuries used for the common benefit of the villagers of the village

such as ponds for various purposes e.g. for their cattle to drink and bathe, for

storing their harvested grain, as grazing ground for the cattle, threshing

floor, maidan for playing by children, carnivals, circuses, ramlila, cart

stands, water bodies, passages, cremation ground or graveyards, etc. These

lands stood vested through local laws in the State, which handed over their

management to Gram Sabhas/Gram Panchayats.              They were generally

treated as inalienable in order that their status as community land be

preserved.   There were no doubt some exceptions to this rule which

permitted the Gram Sabha/Gram Panchayat to lease out some of this land to

landless labourers and members of the scheduled castes/tribes, but this was

only to be done in exceptional cases.





4.    The protection of commons rights of the villagers were so zealously

protected that some legislation expressly mentioned that even the vesting of

the property with the State did not mean that the common rights of villagers

were lost by such vesting. Thus, in 
Chigurupati Venkata Subbayya vs.

                                                                              3



Paladuge Anjayya
, 1972(1) SCC 521 (529) this Court observed :


                    "It is true that the suit lands in view of 
Section 3
 of
             the Estates Abolition Act did vest in the Government.
             That by itself does not mean that the rights of the
             community over it were taken away. Our attention has
             not been invited to any provision of law under which the
             rights of the community over those lands can be said to
             have been taken away. The rights of the community over
             the suit lands were not created by the landholder. Hence
             those rights cannot be said to have been abrogated by
             
Section 3
) of the 
Estates Abolition Act
."



5.    What we have witnessed since Independence, however, is that in large

parts of the country this common village land has been grabbed by

unscrupulous persons using muscle power, money power or political clout,

and in many States now there is not an inch of such land left for the common

use of the people of the village, though it may exist on paper. People with

power and pelf operating in villages all over India systematically encroached

upon communal lands and put them to uses totally inconsistent with its

original character, for personal aggrandizement at the cost of the village

community. This was done with active connivance of the State authorities

and local powerful vested interests and goondas.       This appeal is a glaring

example of this lamentable state of affairs.

                                                                            4


6.    This appeal has been filed against the impugned judgment of a

Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court dated 21.5.2010. By

that judgment the Division Bench upheld the judgment of the learned Single

Judge of the High Court dated 10.2.2010.





7.    It is undisputed that the appellants herein are neither the owner nor the

tenants of the land in question which is recorded as a pond situated in village

Rohar Jagir, Tehsil and District Patiala. They are in fact trespassers and

unauthorized occupants of the land relating Khewat Khatuni No. 115/310,

Khasra No. 369 (84-4) in the said village. They appear to have filled in the

village pond and made constructions thereon.





8.    The Gram Panchayat, Rohar Jagir filed an application under 
Section

7
 of the Punjab Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 to evict the

appellants herein who had unauthorizedly occupied the aforesaid land. In its

petition the Gram Panchayat, Rohar Jagir alleged that the land in question

belongs to the Gram Panchayat, Rohar as is clear from the revenue records.

However, the respondents (appellants herein) forcibly occupied the said land

and started making constructions thereon illegally.      An application was

consequently moved before the Deputy Commissioner informing him about

the illegal acts of the respondents (appellants herein) and stating that the

                                                                             5



aforesaid land is recorded in the revenue records as Gair Mumkin Toba i.e. a

village pond. The villagers have been using the same, since drain water of

the village falls into the pond, and it is used by the cattle of the village for

drinking and bathing. Since the respondents (appellants herein) illegally

occupied the said land an FIR was filed against them but to no avail. It was

alleged that the respondents (appellants herein) have illegally raised

constructions on the said land, and the lower officials of the department and

even the Gram Panchayat colluded with them.





9.    Instead of ordering the eviction of these unauthorized occupants, the

Collector, Patiala surprisingly held that it would not be in the public interest

to dispossess them, and instead directed the Gram Panchayat, Rohar to

recover the cost of the land as per the Collector's rates from the respondents

(appellants herein).    Thus, the Collector colluded in regularizing this

illegality on the ground that the respondents (appellants herein) have spent

huge money on constructing houses on the said land.





10.   Some persons then appealed to the learned Commissioner against the

said order of the Collector dated 13.9.2005 and this appeal was allowed on

12.12.2007. The Learned Commissioner held that it was clear that the Gram

Panchayat was colluding with these respondents (appellants herein), and it

                                                                           6



had not even opposed the order passed by the Collector in which directions

were issued to the Gram Panchayat to transfer the property to these persons,

nor filed an appeal against the Collector's order.





11.   The learned Commissioner held that the village pond has been used

for the common purpose of the villagers and cannot be allowed to be

encroached upon by any private respondents, whether Jagirdars or anybody

else. Photographs submitted before the learned Commissioner showed that

recent attempts had been made to encroach into the village pond by filling it

up with earth and making new constructions thereon. The matter had gone

to the officials for removal of these illegal constructions, but no action was

taken for reasons best known to the authorities at that time. The learned

Commissioner was of the view that regularizing such kind of illegal

encroachment is not in the interest of the Gram Panchayat. The learned

Commissioner held that Khasra No. 369 (84-4) is a part of the village pond,

and the respondents (appellants herein) illegally constructed their houses at

the site without any jurisdiction and without even any resolution of the Gram

Panchayat.





12.   Against the order of the learned Commissioner a Writ Petition was

filed before the learned Single Judge of the High Court which was dismissed

                                                                           7



by the judgment dated 10.2.2010, and the judgment of learned Single Judge

has been affirmed in appeal by the Division Bench of the High Court.

Hence this appeal.





13.      We find no merit in this appeal. The appellants herein were

trespassers who illegally encroached on to the Gram Panchayat land by

using muscle power/money power and in collusion with the officials and

even with the Gram Panchayat. We are of the opinion that such kind of

blatant illegalities must not be condoned. Even if the appellants have built

houses on the land in question they must be ordered to remove their

constructions, and possession of the land in question must be handed back to

the Gram Panchayat. Regularizing such illegalities must not be permitted

because it is Gram Sabha land which must be kept for the common use of

villagers of the village. The letter dated 26.9.2007 of the Government of

Punjab permitting regularization of possession of these unauthorized

occupants is not valid. We are of the opinion that such letters are wholly

illegal and without jurisdiction. In our opinion such illegalities cannot be

regularized.   We cannot allow the common interest of the villagers to suffer

merely because the unauthorized occupation has subsisted for many years.

                                                                           8


14.   
In 
M.I. Builders (P) Ltd. vs. Radhey Shyam Sahu
, 1999(6) SCC

464 the Supreme Court ordered restoration of a park after demolition of a

shopping complex constructed at the cost of over Rs.100 crores.
 
In 
Friends

Colony Development Committee vs. State of Orissa
, 2004 (8) SCC 733

this Court held that even where the law permits compounding of

unsanctioned constructions, such compounding should only be by way of an

exception. In our opinion this decision will apply with even greater force in

cases of encroachment of village common land. Ordinarily, compounding in

such cases should only be allowed where the land has been leased to

landless labourers or members of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, or the

land is actually being used for a public purpose of the village e.g. running a

school for the villagers, or a dispensary for them.






15.   In many states Government orders have been issued by the State

Government permitting allotment of Gram Sabha land to private persons and

commercial enterprises on payment of some money. In our opinion all such

Government orders are illegal, and should be ignored.




16.   The present is a case of land recorded as a village pond. This Court in


Hinch Lal Tiwari vs. Kamala Devi
, AIR 2001 SC 3215 (followed by the

Madras High Court in 
L. Krishnan vs. State of Tamil Nadu
, 2005(4)

                                                                           9



CTC 1 Madras) held that land recorded as a pond must not be allowed to be

allotted to anybody for construction of a house or any allied purpose. The

Court ordered the respondents to vacate the land they had illegally occupied,

after taking away the material of the house. We pass a similar order in this

case.






17.     In this connection we wish to say that our ancestors were not fools.

They knew that in certain years there may be droughts or water shortages for

some other reason, and water was also required for cattle to drink and bathe

in etc. Hence they built a pond attached to every village, a tank attached to

every temple, etc.     These were their traditional rain water harvesting

methods, which served them for thousands of years.





18.     Over the last few decades, however, most of these ponds in our

country have been filled with earth and built upon by greedy people, thus

destroying their original character.    This has contributed to the water

shortages in the country.





19.     Also, many ponds are auctioned off at throw away prices to

businessmen for fisheries in collusion with authorities/Gram Panchayat

officials, and even this money collected from these so called auctions are not

                                                                         1



used for the common benefit of the villagers but misappropriated by certain

individuals. The time has come when these malpractices must stop.




20.   
In Uttar Pradesh the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1954
 was

widely misused to usurp Gram Sabha lands either with connivance of the

Consolidation Authorities, or by forging orders purported to have been

passed by Consolidation Officers in the long past so that they may not be

compared with the original revenue record showing the land as Gram Sabha

land, as these revenue records had been weeded out. Similar may have been

the practice in other States. The time has now come to review all these

orders by which the common village land has been grabbed by such

fraudulent practices.





21.   For the reasons given above there is no merit in this appeal and it is

dismissed.





22.   Before parting with this case we give directions to all the State

Governments in the country that they should prepare schemes for eviction of

illegal/unauthorized      occupants       of       Gram        Sabha/Gram

Panchayat/Poramboke/Shamlat land and these must be restored to the Gram

Sabha/Gram Panchayat for the common use of villagers of the village. For

                                                                           1



this purpose the Chief Secretaries of all State Governments/Union

Territories in India are directed to do the needful, taking the help of other

senior officers of the Governments. The said scheme should provide for the

speedy eviction of such illegal occupant, after giving him a show cause

notice and a brief hearing. Long duration of such illegal occupation or huge

expenditure in making constructions thereon or political connections must

not be treated as a justification for condoning this illegal act or for

regularizing the illegal possession. Regularization should only be permitted

in exceptional cases e.g. where lease has been granted under some

Government notification to landless labourers or members of Scheduled

Castes/Scheduled Tribes, or where there is already a school, dispensary or

other public utility on the land.





23.   Let a copy of this order be sent to all Chief Secretaries of all States

and Union Territories in India who will ensure strict and prompt compliance

of this order and submit compliance reports to this Court from time to time.

                                                                                 1


24.   Although we have dismissed this appeal, it shall be listed before this

Court from time to time (on dates fixed by us), so that we can monitor

implementation of our directions herein.     List again before us on 3.5.2011

on which date all Chief Secretaries in India will submit their reports.




                                                     .............................J.
                                                     [Markandey Katju]


                                                     .............................J.
                                                     [Gyan Sudha Mishra]
New Delhi;

January 28, 2011