Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug vs Union Of India & Ors on 24 January, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
1
, Cited by 
0
]










Top AI Tags


appeal-to-supreme-court, power-to-issue-writ






User Queries


Kem hospital


bombay hospital










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug vs Union Of India & Ors on 24 January, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2011 SC 343


Bench: 
Gyan Sudha Misra
, 
Markandey Katju


                                                                       REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   Writ Petition (Crl.) No.115 OF 2009


Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug                               Petitioner(s)

                VERSUS

Union of India & Ors.                                   Respondent(s)


                                   OR D E R



      Heard learned counsel for the petitioner.



      Euthanasia is one of the most perplexing issues which the courts and

legislatures all over the world are facing today. This Court, in this case, is

facing the same issue, and we feel like a ship in an unchartered sea, seeking

some guidance by the light thrown by the legislations and judicial

precedents of foreign countries.





      The case before us is a writ petition under 
Article 32
 of the

Constitution, and has been filed on behalf of the petitioner Aruna

Ramachandra Shanbaug by one Ms. Pinki Virani of Mumbai, as a next

friend.

      It is stated in the writ petition that the petitioner Aruna Ramachandra

Shanbaug was a staff Nurse working in King Edward Memorial Hospital,

Parel, Mumbai. On the evening of 27th November, 1973 she was attacked by

a sweeper in the hospital who wrapped a dog chain around her neck and

yanked her back with it. He tried to rape her but finding that she was

menstruating, he sodomized her. To immobilize her during this act he

twisted the chain around her neck. The next day on 28th November, 1973 at

7.45 a.m. a cleaner found her lying on the floor with blood all over in an

unconscious condition. It is alleged that due to strangulation by the dog

chain the supply of oxygen to the brain stopped and the brain got damaged.

It is alleged that the Neurologist in the Hospital found that she had planters'

extensor, which means damage to the cortex or some other part of the brain.

She also had brain stem contusion injury with associated cervical cord

injury.



      It is alleged at page 11 of the petition that 36 years have expired since

the incident and now Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug is about 60 years of

age. She is featherweight, and her brittle bones could break if her hand or

leg are awkwardly caught, even accidentally, under her lighter body. She

has stopped menstruating and her skin is now like papier mache' stretched

over a skeleton. She is prone to bed sores. Her wrists are twisted inwards.

Her teeth had decayed causing her immense pain. She can only be given

mashed food, on which she survives.





      It is alleged that Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug is in a persistent
vegetative State and virtually a dead person and has no state of awareness,

and her brain is virtually dead. She can neither see, nor hear anything nor

can she express herself or communicate, in any manner whatsoever.

Mashed food is put in her mouth, she is not able to chew or taste any food.

She is not even aware that food has been put in her mouth. She is not able to

swallow any liquid food, which shows that the food goes down on its own

and not because of any effort on her part. The process of digestion goes on

in this way as the mashed food passes through her system. However, Aruna

is virtually a skeleton. Her excreta and the urine is discharged on the bed

itself. Once in a while she is cleaned up but in a short while again she goes

back into the same sub-human condition. Judged by any parameter, Aruna

cannot be said to be a living person and it is only on account of mashed food

which is put into her mouth there is a fagade of life which is totally devoid

of any human element.       There is not the slightest possibility of any

improvement in her condition and her body lies on the bed in the KEM

Hospital, Mumbai like a dead animal, and this has been the position for the

last 36 years.





      The prayer of the petitioner is that the respondents be directed to stop

feeding Aruna, and let her die peacefully.





      Although, notice had been issued by this Court on 16.12.2009 to all

the respondents in this petition, the only counter affidavit which has been

filed is that on behalf of the respondent no.3 and 4, the Mumbai Municipal
Corporation and the Dean, KEM Hospital. That affidavit, of Dr. Amar

Ramaji Pazare, Professor and Head in the said hospital, states in paragraph 6

that Aruna accepts the food in normal course and responds by facial

expressions. She responds to commands intermittently by making sounds.

She makes sounds when she has to pass stool and urine which the nursing

staff identifies and attends to by leading her to the toilet.



      Thus, there is some variance between the allegations in the writ

petition and the counter affidavit of Dr. Pazare.





      In the circumstances we are of the opinion that a team of three doctors

should be appointed to examine Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug thoroughly

and give a report to us about her physical and mental condition. For this

purpose we are appointing a team of following three doctors :


1)    Dr. J.V. Divatia, Professor and Head, Department of Anesthesia,

      Critical Care and Pain at Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, whose

      mobile     number      is   09869077435       and    e-mail   address   is
      
[email protected]


2)    Dr. Roop Gursahani, Consultant Neurologist at P.D. Hinduja Hospital,

      Mumbai, whose mobile number is 09821087597 and e-mail address is

      
[email protected]


3)    Dr. Nilesh Shah, Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry at

      Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Corporation Medical College and General

      Hospital, whose mobile number is 09821788658 and e-mail address is
      
[email protected]
.





      The above team of doctors is requested to examine the petitioner

Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug at the KEM Hospital thoroughly and submit

us a detailed report about her physical and mental condition so as to enable

us to get the correct facts. The team of above mentioned three doctors

should preferably submit to us a joint report. They can take the help of any

hospital or doctor in Mumbai or elsewhere for the purpose assigned to them

by this order. All hospitals/doctors in Mumbai and elsewhere are directed to

give all assistance and cooperation to this team of doctors appointed by us,

including carrying out any investigation they require.     In particular the

authorities and doctors and staff in KEM Hospital Mumbai will give all

assistance and cooperation to this team so that they may do the work

assigned to them by this order, effectively.





      The Chief Justice of the Bombay High Court is also requested to

kindly extend all help and cooperation to the above mentioned team in any

manner they desire. The State Government of Maharashtra will provide all

facilities to this team of doctors in any manner they desire including

arrangements for their transport, any funds they require for performing their

duties under this order, etc.

             Issue notice to the learned Attorney General of India who is
requested to assist us at the time of the final hearing of this case which is

fixed for 22.02.2011, as the first case on the list. Counter afidavits may be

filed by that date by the respondents who have not as yet filed them. Mr.

T.R. Andhyarujina, learned Sr. Advocate is requested to assist us as amicus

curiae in this matter.



      The question of locus standi of the next friend of the petitioner to

move this petition shall also be considered on the date fixed.


      Let copies of this order as well as copies of the writ petition and the

counter affidavit of Dr. Pazare be sent forthwith to the team of doctors

nominated by us. Copies of the same shall also be given to the learned

Attorney General of India as well as Mr. T.R. Andhyarujina, Sr. Adv.

Copies of this order will also be sent to the doctors appointed by us today to

their e-mail address mentioned above.



                                             ..........................................J.
                                             (MARKANDEY KATJU)


                                             ..........................................J.
                                             (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)
NEW DELHI;

JANUARY 24 , 2011.