Sushila Digambar Naik & Ors vs Maharashtra Housing & Ar.Dev.Authy& ... on 14 January, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
1
, Cited by 
41
]










User Queries


carpet area


mhada


"what is carpet area"


dri 










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Sushila Digambar Naik & Ors vs Maharashtra Housing & Ar.Dev.Authy& ... on 14 January, 2011


Bench: 
A.K. Patnaik
, 
R.V. Raveendran


                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 565 OF 2011
             [Arising out of SLP(C) No.10634/2010]


 SUSHILA DIGAMBAR NAIK & ORS.                .......APPELLANTS

                    Vs.


 MAHARASHTRA HOUSING & AREA                  .....RESPONDENTS
 DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY & ORS.


                              O R D E R



        Leave granted.  Heard.





2.      The members of the fourth respondent-Society decided 

to redevelop the property - Building No.34,Ganesh-Kripa Co-

operative   Housing   Society   Ltd.,   Kher   Nagar,   Bandra   (East) 

Mumbai,   by   demolishing   the   existing   building   through   a 

developer (fifth respondent) in the year 2003. An agreement 

dated   17.6.2003   was   entered   between   the   Society   and   the 

developer in that behalf. It is stated that, at that stage, 

9 out of the 54 members had opposed the development through 

the fifth respondent. 





3.      Under the said agreement, the developer had agreed to 

provide each member/occupant, a flat with a carpet area of 

345   sq.   feet   and   a   balcony/dry   area   of   70   sq.ft.   On 

9.1.2004,   the   first   respondent   (MHADA)   issued   a   NOC   for 

redevelopment   to   MHADA.   However,   subsequently,   the 

appellants herein, who are 18 in number (referred to as non-


co-operating members of the Society comprising the original 

nine   plus   addition   nine   members),   opposed   the   development 

through fifth respondent. That led to the developer (fifth 

respondent)   filing   a   suit   against   the   appellants   for   a 

permanent injunction to restrain them from interfering with 

the development. In the said suit an interim injunction was 

issued against the appellants.





4.      Except   the   appellants,   the   other   members   of   the 

fourth   respondent-Society   vacated   the   premises   and   shifted 

to   transit   accommodation   provided   by   the   developer   (or 

received   an   agreed   sum   as   rent   in   lieu   of   transit 

accommodation). The appellants did not vacate the premises. 

Therefore MHADA passed an order of summary eviction against 

them under 
Section 95A
 of the Maharashtra Housing and Area 

Development   Act,   1976.   That   order   was   challenged   by   the 

appellants   in   Writ   Petition   (Lodging)   10/2010.   The   writ 

petition was dismissed by a learned single Judge, by order 

dated 4.2.2010.  The writ appeal filed by the appellants was 

also   dismissed   by   the   impugned   order   dated   12.3.2010.   The 

said order is challenged by the appellants in this appeal by 

special leave.





5.      The   permissible   FSI   has   been   increased   considerably 

subsequent   to   the   agreement   between   the   fourth   respondent-

Society and the fifth respondent-developer. In view of the 


above   and   to   put   an   end   to   the   litigation,   Mr.   Mukul 

Rohtagi,   learned   senior   counsel   for   the   fifth   respondent- 

developer   on   instructions   from   Mr.   Yogesh   Gupta,   the 

Executive   Director   of   fifth   respondent,   who   is   present   in 

Court, offered that instead of 345 sq. feet carpet area and 

70 sq. feet dry area originally agreed, the fifth respondent 

will construct and make available to each of the 54 members 

of the fourth respondent-Society, including the appellants, 

a flat measuring 525 sq. feet (carpet area) and 116 sq. feet 

(dry area) subject to the following conditions:





(i)   All   appellants   shall   vacate   and   deliver   vacant 

possession   of   their   respective   portions   to   the   developer 

within six weeks from today.





(ii)     The Developer will construct and deliver the flats to 

all the 54 members within thirty months from the expiry of 

the said six weeks.





(iii)    If there is any delay in delivering the flats to the 

54 members (that is, within thirty months plus six weeks), 

the Developer will pay a compensation of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees 

five  thousand) per  month to  each of  the 54  members of  the 

Society   [in   addition   to   the   transit   accommodation/rent-in-


lieu   thereof   (opted   by   some   members)   to   which   the   members 

are entitled].





(iv)      The   corpus   amount   agreed   will   continue   to   be   the 

same. 





6.        Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel for the 

appellants,   on   instructions,   submits   that   in   view   of   the 

better   terms   now   offered   by   the   Developer,   the   appellants 

are   agreeable   to   join   the   other   members   of   the   Society   in 

regard   to   the   development   of   the   property.   The   learned 

counsel for the fourth respondent-Society submitted that the 

Society was agreeable for the revised benefits. Thus all 54 

members of the Society have agreed for the revised benefits 

offered   by   the   developer.   The   said   settlement   between   the 

appellants,   fourth   respondent   and   the   fifth   respondent   is 

recorded. 





7.        Learned   counsel   appearing   for   respondents   1   to   3 

submit that as this is a voluntary arrangement between the 

fourth respondent and its members with the fifth respondent. 

MHADA has no comments to offer or no role in the settlement. 





8.        All parties submitted that the appeal may be disposed 

of   accordingly.   In   view   of   the   above,   recording   the   said 

settlement,   this   appeal   is   disposed   of.   Each   of   the 

appellants, the Society and the developer will be entitled 

to   enforce   the   above,   as   a   decree,   in   the   event   of 


default/breach by the other parties to the settlement.






                                      ....................J.
                                        ( R.V. RAVEENDRAN )
             



                                      ....................J.
                                         ( A.K. PATNAIK )
New Delhi;

January 14, 2011.