Salvation Army vs A. Subbian & Ors on 21 January, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
0
, Cited by 
0
]










User Queries


demolition


Tsunami


expert committee


allottee










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Salvation Army vs A. Subbian & Ors on 21 January, 2011


Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 2205, 2011 (11) SCC 619, AIR 2011 SC (SUPP) 511, (2011) 3 KCCR 307, (2011) 4 SCALE 489, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 734


Bench: 
A K Patnaik
, 
R V Raveendran


                                                         1



                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.848 OF 2011

                      [Arising out of SLP [C] No.4680/2008]





Salvation Army                                                       ... Appellant


                                            Vs.


A.Subbian & Ors.                                                     ... Respondents


With


Civil Appeal No.849 of 2011

[Arising out of SLP [C] No.8560 of 2008] 


Civil Appeal No.850 of 2011

[Arising out of SLP [C] No.7973 of 2008]





                                       O R D E R



        Leave granted. We will refer to the facts and rank of the parties with 


reference to the first matter.



2.      The   appellant   is   an   international   charitable   organization   helping   the 


poor. It came forward to construct 44 houses for the tsunami victims of 26th 


December   2004,   and   entered   into   a   memorandum   of   understanding   dated 



                                               2




3.3.2006 with the Collector, Nagapattinam, in that behalf. Out of 44 houses 


financed by the appellant, 15 houses were constructed by the local villagers 


and   the   remaining   29   houses   by   a   contractor   under   the   supervision   of   the 


support   group   constituted   by   the   District   Collector.   All   the   houses   were 


constructed   at   Uzhavar   Street,   North   Poigainallur,   Nagapattinam   District, 


and were duly inspected and approved for occupation. Almost all the houses 


have been occupied. The fifteen appellants in the two connected appeals are 


the   allottees   of   some   of   those   houses   who   have   been   issued   occupancy 


certificates and residing therein.



3.      A public interest  litigation was filed by the first respondent alleging 


that the houses constructed by the appellant were sub-standard, unsafe and 


unfit   for   human   habitation,   posing   a   threat   to   the   occupants.   He   therefore 


sought a direction to the State of Tamil Nadu and District Collector to take 


action   against   the   appellant   and   a   further   direction   to   monitor   the 


construction by the appellant. 



4.      The   High   Court   appointed   a   two-member   Expert   Committee   to 


inspect the quality of construction. The Committee submitted a report dated 


4.1.2008   recommending   demolition   of   all   the   houses   constructed   by   the 


appellant as not fit for occupation, opining that they were likely to collapse 



                                             3




in  the  event   of an  earthquake  or  a  tsunami.  Acting  on  the  said  report,   the 


High   Court   passed   the   impugned   order   dated   10.1.2008   allowing   the   writ 


petition and directed the appellant to demolish all the houses and remove the 


debris at its cost. The High Court also directed the state government and the 


District   Collector   to   take   possession   of   the   land   where   the   houses   were 


constructed and construct proper quality houses or allot other suitable houses 


to each of the 44 families within two months. The said order is challenged in 


these appeals by special leave by the appellant. The order is also challenged 


by fifteen of the occupants of the houses, in the connected two appeals. 



5.     Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that it had only charity in 


mind  when  it  constructed   the  houses  and  had  financed  the  construction  in 


terms   of   the   Memorandum   of   Understanding;   that   the   actual   construction 


was   carried   out   under   the   supervision   of   a   committee   appointed   by   the 


District Collector; and that if any of the occupants point out any defect in 


construction or any defect which is likely to affect the safety of the houses, it 


is willing to rectify the same at its own cost. It is submitted that the direction 


for demolition was unwarranted. 



                                                 4


6.      Most of the houses are occupied by allottees and none of the allottees 


were impleaded as parties or heard in the matter. As the houses were already 


under occupation of the allottees, any direction for demolition thereof or any 


direction for shifting them to any other place would prejudicially affect them 


and therefore, the occupants ought to have been heard in the matter. They 


were   not   heard   as   they   were   not   made   parties   to   the   writ   petition.   The 


occupants (appellants in the two other appeals) have stated that they have no 


grievance   with   the   construction   and   do   not   want   their   houses   to   be 


demolished. Secondly when the court received the Report dated 4.1.2008 of 


the     Expert   Committee   appointed   by   it   to   examine   the   condition   of   the 


houses, it ought to have made  it available to the appellant  so that it could 


have   responded   to   it,   before   acting   upon   the   said   report.   The   High   Court 


allowed the writ petition immediately after the report was received without 


giving   an   opportunity   to   the   appellant   to   make   its   submissions   on   it.   A 


careful   reading   of   the   report   shows   that   there   is   no   danger   of   the   houses 


collapsing   in   the   normal   course   and   the   opinion   is   that   they   are   likely   to 


collapse only in the event of earthquake or tsunami. On the other hand, the 


Shelter   Advisory   Group  consisting   of  four  experts   while   agreeing   that   the 


construction   is   defective,   has   differed   with   the   opinion   of   the   Expert 


Committee that the houses should be demolished. The Advisory Group has 



                                                 5




suggested that the houses could be retro-fitted with specialized interventions 


and made safe as per the requirements.  It has pointed out that retro-fitting 


will   be   more   advantageous   as   it   can   make   the   houses   safe   as   per   the 


guidelines   and   requirements;   and   can   be   faster   to   implement,   apart   from 


being cost effective. It is stated anything inferior or defective does not call 


for demolition automatically, if other effective alternatives are available. 



7.      Under the guidelines issued by the state government, each house had 


to be constructed at a cost of only Rs.50,000/-, though the appellant was in 


fact   ready   to   offer   even   more   for   the   construction.   The   houses   had   to   be 


constructed with a sense of urgency, to provide accommodation. Some of the 


constructions were carried out by the affected villagers themselves and some 


through a contractor. In these circumstances, some defects are inevitable. In 


the   circumstances,   the   suggestion   of  the   Shelter     Advisory   Group   that   the 


houses should be repaired and retro-fitted to make them compliant with the 


safety   requirements   and   to   remove   the   defects,   appears   to   be   more 


reasonable and a better course than demolition.  On a careful consideration, 


we   are   of   the   view   that   the   direction   to   the   appellant   to   demolish   the   44 


houses   constructed   by   it   for   the   benefit   of   tsunami   victims,   was 


inappropriate and unwarranted. 



                                               6


8.       We   therefore   allow   these   appeals,   set   aside   the   order   of   the   High 


Court   and   dispose   of   the   first   respondent's   PIL   with   the   following 


directions: 



(i)      The appellant is permitted to carry out repairs and retrofitting in the 


44 houses at its own cost, within a period of six months, as agreed by it.



(ii)     The   District   Collector   shall   have   the   44   houses   inspected   after 


repairs/retrofitting, by an expert team, to find out whether they are safe and 


compliant with the guidelines/requirements.  



(iii)    If   any   of   the   houses   is   found   to   be   unsafe   or   unfit   for   human 


occupation,   even   after   such   repairs   and   retrofitting,   the   District   Collector 


may take such steps, including demolition, if necessary. 



 


                                                        .................................J.

                                                        (R V Raveendran)





New Delhi;                                              ...............................J.

January 21, 2011.                                       (A K Patnaik)