Hafeeza Bibi & Ors vs Shaikh Farid(Dead) By Lrs. & Ors on 5 May, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
99
]










Top AI Tags


transfer-of-property


saving-of-donations-mortis-cause-and-mohammedan-law


compulsory-document-registration


registration


effect-of-non-registration-of-documents






User Queries


unregistered gift deed


section 17 registration act


gifts in muslims


muslim law


HIBA


registered gift deed


transfer of property act


gift deed


oral gift 


delivery of possession


gift of immovable property


shaik dawood


gift possession


transfer of property


gift acceptance


"unregistered gift deed"


andhra pradesh high court


compulsorily registrable 


gifted property


registration act










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Hafeeza Bibi & Ors vs Shaikh Farid(Dead) By Lrs. & Ors on 5 May, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 1695, 2011 AIR SCW 2927, 2011 AIR CC 1867 (SC), AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 1339, (2011) 3 KER LJ 3, (2011) 113 REVDEC 796, 2011 (5) SCC 654, (2011) 3 CGLJ 489, (2011) 87 ALL LR 502, (2011) 5 CAL HN 144, (2011) 3 CIVLJ 881, (2011) 6 MAD LJ 309, (2011) 5 MAH LJ 24, (2011) 103 ALLINDCAS 81 (SC), (2011) 1 CLR 1050 (SC), (2011) 2 ALL RENTCAS 218, (2012) 113 CUT LT 147, (2011) 3 ANDHLD 131, (2011) 4 PAT LJR 21, (2011) 3 ALLMR 981 (SC), (2011) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 503, (2011) 4 MPLJ 46, (2011) 2 KER LT 661, (2011) 3 MAD LW 700, (2011) 3 RAJ LW 1986, (2011) 3 ICC 553, (2011) 5 SCALE 371, (2011) 3 ALL WC 3142, (2011) 2 CURCC 172, 2011 (4) KCCR SN 358 (SC), (2011) 5 BOM CR 769


Author: 
R.M. Lodha


Bench: 
Surinder Singh Nijjar
, 
R.M. Lodha


                                                                                   REPORTABLE 
                                                                                                 





                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                    CIVIL  APPEAL NO. 1714 OF 2005





Hafeeza Bibi & Ors.                                           .... Appellants


                                     Versus


Shaikh Farid (Dead) by LRs. & Ors.                              ....Respondents 





                                 JUDGMENT



R.M. Lodha, J. 





             This   appeal,   by   special   leave,   arises   from   the   judgment 


of   the   High   Court   of   Andhra   Pradesh   dated   September   13,   2004 


whereby the Single Judge of that Court set aside the judgment and 


decree   dated   April   27,   1988   passed   by   the   Principal,   Subordinate 


Judge,   Vishakhapatnam   and   remitted   the   matter   back   to   the   trial 






                                                                                    1



court   for   the   purpose   of   passing   a   preliminary   decree   after 


determining the shares to which each party would be entitled. 



2.             Shaik   Dawood   had   three   sons;   Shaik   Farid,     Mehboob 


Subhani   and   Mohammed   Yakub.   He   also   had   five   daughters; 


Sappoora Bibi,  Khairunnisa Begum, Noorajahan Begum,  Rabia Bibi 


and   Alima   Bibi.   All   the   five   daughters   were   married.   His   wife 


predeceased him. Shaik Dawood retired as Reserve Head Constable. 


He was also a Unani Medical Practitioner.  





3.             Shaik   Farid,   Sappoora   Bibi,   Khairunnisa   Begum, 


Noorajahan Begum and Mohd. Iqbal (son of Alima Bibi) - hereinafter 


referred   to   as   `plaintiffs'   -   filed   a   suit   for   partition   against     Mehboob 


Subhani,   Mohammed   Yakub   and     Rabia   Bibi   (hereinafter   referred   to 


as   `defendant   1',   `defendant   2'   and   `defendant   3'   respectively).   The 


son  and  daughters   of  Syed  Ali,   who was  brother   of    Shaik  Dawood, 


were   impleaded   as   other   defendants   (hereinafter   referred   to   as 


`defendants 4 to 7').





4.             The   parties   are   governed   by   Sunni   Law.   The   plaintiffs 


averred   in the plaint that Shaik Dawood died intestate on December 


19, 1968 and the plaintiffs and defendants   1 to 3 became entitled to 


`A' schedule properties and half share in `B' schedule properties. The 





                                                                                             2



plaintiffs   stated   that   the   defendants   4   to   7   are   entitled   to   other   half 


share in `B' schedule properties.





5.              Mohammed  Yakub  --  defendant    2  --  contested  the suit 


for partition. He set up the defence that Shaik Dawood  executed hiba 


(gift   deed)   on   February   5,   1968   and   gifted   his   properties     to   him. 


Shaik  Dawood  put  him  in  possession  of  the  hiba  properties   on    that 


day   itself.     The   hiba   became   complete   and   the   plaintiffs   were   fully 


aware   of   that   fact.   The   defendant     2     in   his   written   statement   also 


referred   to   a   previous   suit   for   partition   filed   by   some   of   the   parties 


which was dismissed in default.





6.              Some   of   the   original   parties     have   died   during   the 


pendency   of   the   suit.   Their   legal   representatives   have   been   brought 


on record.  





7.              The trial court framed four issues.   The issue   relevant for 


the purpose of the present appeal is issue no.2 which is to the effect 


whether hiba dated February 5, 1968 is true, valid and binding on the 


plaintiffs. The trial court, after recording the evidence and on hearing 


the   parties,   answered   issue   no.   2   in   the   affirmative   and,     held   that 


plaintiffs   were   not   entitled   to   the   shares   claimed   in   the   plaint. 






                                                                                            3



Consequently, vide judgment and decree dated April 27, 1988, the trial 


court dismissed the plaintiffs'  suit. 





8.             The   plaintiffs   challenged   the   judgment   and   decree   of   the 


trial   court   before   the   High   Court.     Inter   alia,   one   of   the   arguments 


raised  before the High Court on behalf of the appellants was that the 


gift dated February 5, 1968 being  in writing was compulsorily required 


to   be   registered   and   stamped   and   in   absence   thereof,   the   gift   deed 


could   not   be   accepted   or   relied   upon   for   any   purpose   and   such 


unregistered gift deed would not confer any title upon the defendant 2. 


The   High   Court   was   persuaded   by   the   argument   and   held   that   the 


unregistered gift deed would not pass any title to the defendant 2 as 


pleaded   by   him.   The   High   Court,   as   indicated   above,   allowed   the 


appeal; set aside the judgment and decree of the trial court and sent 


the matter back to that court for the purposes of passing a preliminary 


decree.





9.             The   present   appellants   are   legal   heirs   of   the   deceased 


defendant 2.





10.            As to whether or not the High Court is  right in its view that 


the   unregistered   gift   deed   dated   February   5,   1968   is   not   a   valid   gift 






                                                                                          4



and   conveyed   no   title   to   the   defendant   2   is   the   question   for 


determination in  this appeal. 





11.              There is divergence of opinion amongst High Courts on the 


question presented before us. 





12.              The Privy Council in the case of  Mohammad Abdul Ghani 


(since   deceased)   &   Anr.v.  Fakhr   Jahan   Begam   &   Ors.1    referred   to 


`Mohammadan Law'; by Syed Ameer Ali  and approved the statement 


made therein that three conditions   are necessary for a valid gift by a 


Muslim: (a) manifestation of the wish to give on the part of the donor; 



(b) the acceptance of the donee, either impliedly or expressly; (c) the 


taking     of   possession   of   the   subject-matter   of   the   gift   by  the   donee, 


either actually or constructively.





13.              
In  
Mahboob Sahab  v.  Syed Ismail
 and others2, this Court 


referred   to   the   Principles   of   Mahomedan   Law   by   Mulla,   19th  Edition 


and in paragraph 5 (pp. 696-697) noticed the legal position, in relation 


to a gift by Muslim incorporated therein, thus :


          "5.  Under   Section   147   of   the  Principles   of   Mahomedan  

          Law  by   Mulla,   19th   Edn.,   edited   by   Chief   Justice   M. 

          Hidayatullah, envisages that writing is not essential to the 

          validity   of   a   gift   either   of   moveable   or   of   immovable 

          property.   Section   148   requires   that   it   is   essential   to   the 

          validity   of   a   gift   that   the   donor   should   divest   himself 


1  1922 (49) IA 195

2 (1995) 3 SCC 693




                                                                                           5



        completely of all ownership and dominion over the subject 

        of   the   gift.   Under   Section   149,   three   essentials   to   the 

        validity of the gift should be, (i) a declaration of gift by the 

        donor, (ii) acceptance of the gift, express or implied, by or 

        on behalf of the donee, and (iii) delivery of possession of 

        the   subject   of   the   gift   by   the   donor   to   the   donee   as 

        mentioned in Section 150. If these conditions are complied 

        with, the gift is complete. Section 150 specifically mentions 

        that for a valid gift there should be delivery of possession of 

        the subject of the gift and taking of possession of the gift by 

        the  donee, actually or constructively.  Then only the gift is 

        complete. Section 152 envisages that where the donor is in 

        possession,   a   gift   of   immovable   property   of   which   the 

        donor   is   in   actual   possession   is   not   complete   unless   the 

        donor   physically   departs   from   the   premises   with   all   his 

        goods   and   chattels,   and   the   donee   formally   enters   into 

        possession.   It   would,   thus,   be   clear   that   though   gift   by   a 

        Mohammedan   is   not   required   to   be   in   writing   and 

        consequently need not be registered under the 
Registration 

        Act
; for a gift to be complete, there should be a declaration 

        of the gift by the donor; acceptance of the gift, expressed 

        or   implied,   by   or   on   behalf   of   the   donee,   and   delivery   of 

        possession of the property, the subject-matter of the gift by 

        the donor to the donee. The donee should take delivery of 

        the   possession   of   that   property   either   actually   or 

        constructively.   On  proof of  these  essential   conditions,  the 

        gift   becomes   complete   and   valid.   In   case   of   immovable 

        property   in   the   possession   of   the   donor,   he   should 

        completely   divest   himself   physically   of   the   subject   of   the 

        gift......." 





14.           
Section   123
   of   the   Transfer   of   Property   Act,   1882   (for 


short,   `
T.P.   Act
')   lays   down   the   manner   in   which   gift   of   immoveable 


property may be effected. It reads thus :





        "S.123.   Transfer   how   effected.   --  For   the   purpose   of 

        making a gift of immoveable property, the transfer must be 

        effected by a registered instrument signed by or on behalf 

        of the donor, and attested by at least two witnesses.




                                                                                            6


                For   the   purpose   of   making   a   gift   of   moveable 

        property,   the   transfer   may   be   effected   either   by   a 

        registered instrument signed as aforesaid or by delivery.


                Such   delivery   may   be   made   in   the   same   way   as 

        goods sold may be delivered."





15.             However, an exception is carved out in 
Section 129
 of the 


T.P.   Act   with   regard   to   the   gifts   by   a   Mohammadan.   It   reads   as 


follows: 





        "
S.129
.   Saving   of   donations                          mortis   causa     and 

        Muhammadan  Law.   --   Nothing   in   this   Chapter   relates   to 

        gifts of moveable property made in contemplation of death, 

        or shall be deemed to affect any rule of Muhammadan law."





16.             At   this   stage,   we   may   also   refer   to   
Section   17
   of   the 


Registration Act, 1908  which makes registration of certain documents 


compulsory.   
Section   17
   of   the   Registration   Act,   to   the   extent   it   is 


necessary, reads as follows :





        "
S.17
.  Documents   of   which   registration   is   compulsory.


        --(1)   The   following   documents   shall   be   registered,   if   the 

        property to which they relate is situate in a district in which, 

        and   if   they   have   been   executed   on   or   after   the   date   on 

        which, Act No. XVI of 1864, or the 
Indian Registration Act, 

        1866
,   or   the   
Indian   Registration   Act,   1871
,   or   the   
Indian 

        Registration   Act,   1877
,     or   this   Act   came   or   comes   into 

        force, namely:--



        (a) instruments of gift of immovable property;



        (b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ;


        (c) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ;






                                                                                              7


        (d)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . ;



        (e) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . ."





17.             
Section 49
 of the Registration Act deals with the effect of 


non-registration of documents required to be registered.  It reads thus: 



           "
S.49
.  Effect   of   non-   registration   of   documents 

           required   to   be   registered.-   No   document   required   by 

           
section   17
     or   by   any   provision   of   the   
Transfer   of 

           Property Act, 1882
 (4 of 1882),  to be registered shall--



            (a)  affect any immovable property comprised therein or 



            (b) confer any power to adopt, or 



            (c) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting 

           such   property   or   conferring   such   power,   unless   it   has 

           been registered: 





                Provided   that   an   unregistered   document   affecting 

           immovable   property   and   required   by   this   Act   or   the 

           
Transfer   of   Property   Act,   1882
   (4   of   1882   ),   to   be 

           registered may be received as evidence of a contract in a 

           suit   for   specific   performance   under   Chapter   II   of   the 

           Specific Relief Act, 1877 (3 of 1877 ), or as evidence of 

           any collateral transaction not required  to be effected by 

           registered instrument." 





18.             
Section 17(1)(a)
 of the Registration Act leaves no manner 


of   doubt   that   an   instrument   of   gift   of   immoveable   property   requires 


registration   irrespective   of   the   value   of   the   property.  The   question   is 


about its applicability to a written gift executed by a Mohammadan in 






                                                                                       8



the light of 
Section 129
 of the T.P. Act and the rule of Mohammadan 


Law relating to gifts. 





19.             
In the case of  
Nasib Ali  v.  Wajed Ali3
,  the contention was 


raised  before  the  Division   Bench  of  the  Calcutta  High  Court   that  the 


deed   of   gift,   not   being   registered   under   the   
Registration   Act
,   is   not 


admissible in evidence. The Calcutta High Court held that a deed of 


gift   by   a   Mohammadan   is   not   an   instrument   effecting,   creating   or 


making   the   gift  but  a  mere   piece   of   evidence.   This  is   what  the   High 


Court said :






         ".........The   position   under   the   Mahomedan   Law   is   this   : 


         that a gift in order to be valid must be made in accordance 

         with the forms stated above; and even if it is evidenced by 

         writing, unless all the essential forms are observed, it is not 

         valid   according   to   law.   That   being   so,   a   deed   of   gift 

         executed by a Mahomedan is not the instrument effecting, 

         creating or making the gift but a mere piece of evidence. It 

         may so happen after a lapse of time that the evidence of 

         the   observance   of   the   above   forms   might   not   be 

         forthcoming, so it is sometimes thought prudent; to reduce 

         the fact that a gift has been made into writing. Such writing 

         is not a document of title but is a piece of evidence.



         3.   The   law   with   regard   to   the   gift   being   complete   by 

         declaration and delivery of possession is so clear that in a 

         case   before   their   Lordships   of   the   Judicial   Committee 

         Kamarunnissa Bibi v. Hussaini Bibi [1880] 3 All. 266, where 

         a gift was  said to have  been made  in lieu of dower,  their 

         Lordships   held   that   the   requisite   forms   having   been 

         observed   it   was   not   necessary   to   enquire   whether   there 

         was any consideration for the gift or whether there was any 

         dower   due.   The  case   of  Karam  Ilahi  v.  Sharfuddin  [1916] 



3 AIR 1927 Cal 197




                                                                                        9



38 All. 212 is similar in principle to the present case. There 

also a deed relating to the gift was executed. The learned 

Judge held that if the gift was valid under the Mahomedan 

Law it was none the less valid because there was a deed 

of   gift   which,   owing   to   some   defect,   was   invalid   under 


Section   123
,   Transfer   of   Property   Act,   and   could   not   be 

used in evidence.





4. The next, question that calls for consideration is whether 

a document like the present one executed by a Mahomedan 

donor after  he made a gift to show that  he had made it  in 

favour   of   the   donee   is   compulsorily   registrable   under   the 


Registration   Act
.   Under   
Section   17
   of   the   Registration   Act 

an instrument of gift must be registered. By the expression 

'instrument   of   gift   of   immovable   property'   I   understand   an 

instrument or deed which creates, makes or completes the 

gift, thereby transferring the ownership of the property from 

the executant to the person in whose favour it is executed. 


In   order   to   affect   the   immovable   property,   the   document 

must be a document of transfer; and if it is a document of 

transfer   it   must   be   registered   under   the   provisions   of   the 


Registration Act
.





5.   The   present   document   does   not   affect   immovable 

property.   It   does   not   transfer   the   immovable   property   from 

the donor to the donee. It only affords evidence of the fact 

that   the   donor   has   observed   the   formalities   under   the 

Mahomedan   Law   in   making   the   gift   to   the   donee.   I   am 

prepared   to   go   so   far   as   to   hold   that   a   document   like   the 

present   one   is   not   compulsorily   registrable   under   the 


Registration Act
, or the 
Registration Act
 does not apply to a 

so-called   deed   of   gift   executed   by   a   Mahomedan.   But   for 

purposes of the present case it is not necessary to go so far 

because   I   hold   that   this   document   is   only   a   piece   of 

evidence,   and   conceding   that   it   should,   have   been 

registered,   the   effect   of   its   non-registration   is   to   make   it 

inadmissible   in   evidence   under   
Section   49
   of   the 

Registration Act........."





                                                                                      10


20.                 In  Sankesula   Chinna   Budde   Saheb  v.  Raja   Subbamma4,  


the Andhra Pradesh High Court, after noticing the three essentials of a 


gift under the   Mohammadan Law, held that if a gift was   reduced to 


writing,   it   required   registration     under   
Section   17(1)(a)
   of   the 


Registration Act. It went on to hold that  even if by virtue of   
Section 


129
 of the T.P. Act, a deed of gift executed by  Mohammadan was  not 


required to comply with the provisions of 
Section 123
 of the T.P. Act, 


still it had   to be registered under 
Section 17(1)(a)
 of the Registration 


Act when the gift related  to immoveable property.  



21.                 A Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case 


of Inspector General of Registration and Stamps, Govt.  of Hyderabad 


v.  Smt. Tayyaba Begum5,  was called upon to decide on   a reference 


made   by   the   Board   of   Revenue   under   Section   55   of   the   Hyderabad 


Stamp Act whether the document  under consideration therein  was a 


gift deed or it merely  evidenced    a past transaction.  The  High  Court 


applied the test - whether the parties regarded  the instrument to be a 


receptacle   and   appropriate   evidence   of   the   transaction;   was   it 


intended to constitute the gift or was it to serve as a record of a past 


event - and held as under : 





4 1954 2 MLJ 113

5 AIR 1962 Andhra Pradesh 199




                                                                                 11



         "12.     We have to examine the document in question in the 

         light   of   these   rules.   No   doubt,   there   was   recitals   therein 

         which relate to past transaction. But that is not decisive of 

         the matter. What is the purpose which it was  designed to 

         serve?   That   the   executant   did   not   treat   it   as   a 

         memorandum of a completed hiba is evident from some of 

         the   sentences.     In   the   deed,   such   as   "I   deemed   it 

         necessary to execute a deed also making a declaration in 

         favour of my son...in accordance with the Muslim law", and 

         the last portion of the document. The anxiety of the donor 

         to free the title of the donee to the property from all doubts 

         and to save him from future litigation is clearly exhibited in 

         the last sentence.





                 "I   pray   that   no   one   may   have   any   kind   of   doubt 

                 regarding   the   ownership   of   Syed   Ehasan   Hussain 

                 and that if per chance any doubt at all should arise, 

                 this deed of Ekrarnama may prove sufficient."



                  This   sentence   is   expressive   of   her   intention   to 

         silence all doubts regarding the ownership of the property 

         with the aid of this document. She did not want anyone to 

         challenge   the   title   of   the   donee   to  the   house   in   question. 

         This   object   could   be   attained   only   if   it   is   regarded   as   a 

         conveyance, a document which effected the transfer by its 

         own force. If, on the other hand, if it is a mere record of a 

         past   transaction,   that   would   not   have   the   desired   effect. 

         There is one circumstance which gives some indication as 

         to   the   intention   of   the   executant   of   the   document.   The 

         document   is   attested   by   two   witnesses   as   required   by 

         
Section 123
 of the Transfer of Property Act. No doubt, this 

         is   not   conclusive   of   the   matter.   But   it   is   indicative   of   the 

         desire of the executant that it should serve as evidence of 

         the gift and not as a memorandum of a past transaction."






22.              
In Makku Rawther's Children: 
Assan Ravther and others v. 


Manahapara   Charayil6,  V.R.   Krishna   Iyer,   J.
   (as   His   Lordship   then 


6 AIR 1972 Kerala 27




                                                                                                12



was) did not agree with the test applied   by the Full Bench of Andhra 


Pradesh High Court  and the reasoning given in Tayyaba Begum5 . He 


held in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the report thus :






      "8.     I   regret   my   inability   to   agree   with   the   reasoning   in 

      these decisions. In the context of 
Section 17
, a document 

      is the same as an instrument and to draw nice distinctions 

      between the two only serves to baffle, not to ill mine. Mulla 

      says:   "The   words   `document'   and   `instrument'   are   used 

      interchangeable   in   the   Act".     An   instrument   of   gift   is   one 

      whereby   a   gift   is   made.   Where   in   law   a   gift   cannot   be 

      effected   by   a   registered   deed   as   such,   it   cannot   be   an 

      instrument   of   gift.   The   legal   position   is   well-settled.   A 

      Muslim   gift   may   be   valid   even   without   a   registered   deed 

      and   may   be   invalid   even   with   a   registered   deed. 

      Registration   being   irrelevant   to   its   legal   force,   a   deed 

      setting  out  Muslim gift cannot be regarded  as constitutive 

      of the gift and is not compulsorily registerable."




      9.   Against   this  argument  counsel   invoked  the   authority   of 

      the   Andhra   Pradesh   Full   Bench.   One   may   respect   the 

      ruling but still reiect the reasoning. The Calcutta Bench in 

      AIR 1927 Cal 197 has discussed the issue from the angle I 

      have presented. The logic of the law matters more than the 

      judicial   numbers   behind   a   view.   The   Calcutta   Bench 

      argued:





             "The essentials of a gift under the Mahomedan law 

             are   .....   A   simple   gift   can   only   be   made   by   going 

             through   the   above   formalities   and   no   written 

             instrument   is   required.   In   fact   no   writing   is 

             necessary to validate a gift; and if a gift is made by 

             a written instrument without delivery of possession, 

             it is invalid in law ..... That being so, a deed of gift 

             executed   by   a   Mahomedan   is   not   the   instrument 

             effecting,   creating   or   making   the   gift   but   a   mere 

             piece   of   evidence   .....   Under   
Section   17
   of   the 

             Registration   Act   an   instrument   of   gift   must   be 




                                                                                         13



               registered. By the expression 'instrument of gift of 

               immovable property' I understand an instrument or 

               deed   which   creates,   makes   or   completes   the   gift 

               thereby transferring the ownership of the property 

               .....   The   present   document   does   not   affect 

               immovable   property.   It   does   not   transfer   an 

               immovable   property   from   the   donor   to   the   donee 

               which   only   affords   evidence   of   the   fact   that   the 

               donor   has   observed   the   formalities   under   the 

               Mahomedan   law   in   making   the   gift   .....   I   am 

               prepared  to go so far as to hold that a document 

               like the present one is not compulsorily registrable 

               under the 
Registration Act
, or the 
Registration Act
 

               does not apply to a so-called deed of gift executed 

               by a Mahomedan."





        These observations of Suhrawardy, J. have my respectful 

        concurrence. So confining myself to this contention for the 

        nonce,   I   am   inclined   to   hold   that   Ext.   B1   is   admissible 

        notwithstanding   Ss.   17   and   49   of   the   
Indian   Registration 

        Act
.   This   conclusion,   however,   is   little   premature   if   I   may 

        anticipate my opinion on the operation of 
Section 129
 of the 

        Transfer of Property Act expressed later in this judgment. 

        Indeed, in the light of my interpretation of Section 129, Ext. 

        B1   needs   to   be   registered.   For   the   present   I   indicate   my 

        conclusion,   if   the   law   of   gifts   for   Muslims   were   not   to   be 

        governed by Section 129."





23.            The   Full   Bench   of   Jammu   and   Kashmir   High   Court   in 


Ghulam   Ahmad   Sofi  v.  Mohd.   Sidiq   Dareel   and   others7    had   an 


occasion  to consider the question whether in view of the provisions of 



Sections   123
   and   
129
   of   the   T.P.   Act,   the   rule   of   gifts   in 


Mohammadan Law    stands superseded; and whether it is necessary 


that there   should be a registered instrument as required by 
Sections 



7
 AIR 1974 Jammu & Kashmir 59




                                                                                             14



123 and 138 of the 
T.P. Act
 in the case of gifts made  under that Law. 


The Full Bench noticed the statutory provisions and also decisions of 


different High Courts including the decision of Calcutta High Court in 


the case of Nasib Ali3. The Full Bench  held  as follows :




         "14.    The ratio of the above cited authorities is therefore in 

         favour  of the  proposition  that  an  oral  gift made  under the 

         Muslim   law   would   not   be   affected   by   
Section   123
   of   the 

         Transfer of Property Act and the gift if it has otherwise all 

         the attributes of a valid gift under the Muslim Law would not 

         become   invalid   because   there   is   no   instrument   in   writing 

         and   registered.   Therefore   the   answer   to   the   question 

         formulated would be in the negative i.e. that 
Sections 123
 

         and 
129
 of the Transfer of Property Act do not supersede 

         the Muslim law on matters relating to making of oral gifts, 

         that   it   is   not   essential   that   there   should   be   a   registered 

         instrument   as   required   by   
Sections   123
   and   
138
   of   the 

         Transfer   of   Property   Act   in   such   cases.   But   if   there   is 

         executed   an   instrument   and   its   execution   is 

         contemporaneous   with   the   making   of   the   gift   then   in   that 

         case the instrument must be registered as provided under 

         
Section           17
          of         the          Registration            

         Act. If, however, the making of the gift is an antecedent act 

         and a deed is executed afterwards as evidencing the said 

         transaction   that   does   not   require   registration   as   it   is   an 

         instrument   made   after   the   gift   is   made   and   does   not 

         therefore   create,   make   or   complete   the   gift   thereby 

         transferring   the   ownership   of   the   property   from   the 

         executant to the person in whose  favour it is executed."  





24.              The Single Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the 


case of  
Chota Uddandu Sahib  v.  Masthan Bi
 (died) and others8, was 


concerned   with   the   question   about   the   gift   by    Mohammadan.     The 




8 AIR 1975 Andhra Pradesh 271




                                                                                            15



Single Judge referred to some of the decisions noticed above and few 


other decisions and held in paragraph 10 of the report thus :


         "10.   Under   
Section  129
  of   the   Transfer   of   Property   Act, 

         nothing in Chapter VII relates to gifts of movable property 

         made   in   contemplation   of   death   or   shall   be   deemed   to 

         affect   any   rule   of   Mohammadan   Law.     According   to   the 

         Mohammedan   Law,   there   can   be   a   valid   gift,   if   three 

         essentials  of the gift are satisfied.  (1) a declaration of the 

         gift by the donor, (2) the acceptance of the gift express or 

         implied   by   or   on   behalf   of   the   donee   and   (3)   delivery   of 

         possession of the subject of gift by the donor to the donee. 

         If  these   conditions  are  complied  with  the   gift  is  complete. 

         According   to   Muslim   law   it   is   not   necessary   that   there 

         should be a deed of gift in order to make it a valid gift, but 

         of course, if there is a deed it should be registered. But if 

         the   deed   is   merely   a   memoranda   of   an   already   effected 

         gift,   then   it   stands   on   a   separate   footing.   In   view   of   this 

         specific provision of Muslim Law, which is saved by 
Section 

         129
, it cannot be held that the gifts amongst muslims also 

         should satisfy the provisions of Chapter VII.   . . . . . . . . . . . 

         Hence if all the formalities, as prescribed  by Muslim Law, 

         regarding the making of gifts are satisfied, the gift is valid 

         notwithstanding   the   fact   that   it   is   oral   and   without   any 

         instrument.   If   there   is   a   contemporaneous   document   it 

         should be registered.  But if the gift is antecedent  and the 

         deed is subsequent merely evidencing the past transaction, 

         it does not require registration, because it does not by itself 

         make or complete the gift. . . . . . . . . ." 





25.             
In   the   case   of  
Amirkhan  v.  Ghouse   Khan9
,   one   of   the 


questions that  arose for consideration  before the Madras High Court 


was : whether the gift of the immoveable property by  Mohammadan, if 


reduced   to   writing,     required   registration.  The   Single   Judge   of   the 




9 (1985) 2 MLJ 136




                                                                                               16



Madras   High   Court   concluded   that   though   a  Mohammadan  could 


create a valid gift orally,  if he should reduce the same in writing, the 


gift will not be valid unless it is duly registered.


26.             
In   the   case   of  
Md.   Hesabuddin   and   others  v.  Md.  


Hesaruddin
   and   others10,   the   question   with   regard   to   gift   of 


immoveable   property   written   on   ordinary   unstamped   paper   arose 


before   the   Gauhati   High   Court.   That   was   a   case   where   a 


Mohammadan mother made a gift of land in favour of her son by a gift 


deed written on ordinary unstamped paper.
   The Single Judge of the 


High   Court   relying   upon   an   earlier   decision   of   that   Court   in  Jubeda  


Khatoon v. Moksed Ali11 held as under:





         ".....   But   it   cannot   be   taken   as   sine   qua   non   in   all   cases 

         that wherever there is a writing about a Mahomedan gift of 

         immovable   property,   there   must   be   registration   thereof. 

         The   facts   and   circumstances   of   each   case   have   to   be 

         taken into consideration before finding whether the writing 

         requires registration or not. The essential requirements, as 

         said   before,   to   make   a   Mahomedan   gift   valid   are 

         declaration   by   the   donor,   acceptance   by   the   donee   and 

         delivery of possession to the donee. It was held in Jubeda 

         Khatoon v. Moksed Ali, AIR 1973 Gau 105 (at p. 106)-


         "Under the Mahomedan Law three things are necessary for 

         creation   of   a   gift.   They   are   (i)   declaration   of   gift   by   the 

         donor, (ii) acceptance of the gift express or implied by or on 

         behalf of the donee and (iii) delivery of possession of the 

         subject of the gift by the donor to the donee. The deed of 



10 AIR 1984 Gauhati 41

11 AIR 1973 Gauhati 105




                                                                                               17



gift is immaterial for creation of gift under the Mahomedan 

Law.   A   gift   under   the   Mahomedan   Law   is   not   valid   if   the 

above mentioned essentials  are  not  fulfilled,  even  if  there 

be a deed of gift or even a registered deed of gift. In other 

words  even if there be a declaration of acceptance of the 

gift, there will be no valid gift under the Mahomedan Law if 

there be no delivery of possession, even though there may 

be registered deed of gift." In that case there was a deed of 

gift which was not produced during trial. Still it was found in 

that   case   that   had   the   defendants   produced   the   deed   of 

gift, at best it would have proved a declaration of the gift by 

the   donor   and   acceptance   thereof   by   the   donee.   It   was 

further held that despite this the defendants would have to 

lead   independent   oral   evidence   to   prove   delivery   of 

possession in order to prove a valid gift. Therefore it was 

found in that case that deed of gift under the Mahomedan 

Law does not create a disposition of property. Relying  on 

this it cannot be said that whenever there is a writing with 

regard to a gift executed by the donor, it must be proved as 

a   basic   instrument   of   gift   before   deciding   the   gift   to   be 

valid. In the instant case a mere writing in the plain paper 

as   aforesaid   containing   the   declaration   of   gift   cannot 

tantamount to a formal instrument of gift. Ext. A (2) has in 

the   circumstances   of   the   present   case   to   be   taken   as   a 

form of declaration of the donor. In every case the intention 

of   the   donor,   the   background   of   the   alleged   gift   and   the 

relation of the donor and the donee as well as the purpose 

or motive of the gift all have to be taken into consideration. 

In the present case,  it is recited in the said writings that the 

3rd defendant  has been maintaining and looking after the 

donor   and   that   the   other   children   of   the   donor   were 

neglecting her. The gift was from a mother to a son and it 

was   based   on   love   and   affection   for   the   son   in   whose 

favour the gift was made. Therefore, it cannot be held that 

because a declaration is contained in the paper Ext. A (2) 

the latter must have been registered in order to render the 

gift   valid.   Admittedly,   the   3rd   defendant   has   been 

possessing   the   land   and   got   his   name   mutated   in   the 

revenue   records   with   respect   to   the   land.   It   is   therefore 

implied that there was acceptance on behalf of the donee 

and also that the possession of the property was delivered 

to the donee by the donor. It should be remembered that 

unless   there   was   possession   on   behalf   of   the   3rd 



                                                                                  18



         defendant, no mutation would have taken place with regard 

         to the property. It may be repeated that Ext. A (2) has to be 

         taken   in   the   present   case   as   a   mere   declaration   of   the 

         donor in presence  of the witnesses  who  are said to have 

         attested the writing."





27.             The   position   is   well   settled,   which   has   been   stated   and 


restated   time   and   again,   that   the   three   essentials   of   a   gift   under 


Mohammadan  Law   are;   (i)   declaration   of   the   gift   by   the   donor;   (2) 


acceptance   of   the   gift   by   the   donee   and   (3)   delivery   of   possession. 


Though, the rules of  Mohammadan Law do not make writing essential 


to the validity of a gift; an oral gift fulfilling all the three essentials make 


the gift complete and irrevocable. However, the donor may record the 


transaction   of   gift   in   writing.   Asaf   A.   A.   Fyzee   in   Outlines   of 


Muhammadan  Law,   Fifth   Edition   (edited   and   revised   by   Tahir 


Mahmood) at page 182 states in this regard that writing may be of two 


kinds   :   (i)   it   may  merely   recite   the   fact   of   a   prior   gift;   such   a   writing 


need   not   be   registered.   On   the   other   hand,   (ii)   it   may   itself   be   the 


instrument   of   gift;   such   a   writing   in   certain   circumstances   requires 


registration.  He further says that if there is a declaration, acceptance 


and delivery of possession coupled with the formal instrument of a gift, 


it must be registered.     Conversely, the author   says that registration, 






                                                                                                   19



however,   by   itself   without   the   other   necessary   conditions,   is   not 


sufficient. 





28.             Mulla,   Principles   of   Mahomedan   Law   (19th  Edition),   Page 


120, states the legal position in the following words :




        "Under the  Mahomedan  law the three essential  requisites 

        to make a gift valid : (1) declaration of the gift by the donor: 


        (2)   acceptance   of   the   gift   by   the   donee   expressly   or 

        impliedly   and   (3)   delivery   of   possession   to   and   taking 

        possession thereof by the donee actually or constructively. 


        No   written   document   is   required   in   such   a   case.   
Section 

        129
   Transfer   of   Property   Act,   excludes   the   rule   of 

        Mahomedan   law   from   the   purview   of   Section   123   which 

        mandates   that   the   gift   of   immovable   property   must   be 

        effected by a registered instrument as stated therein. But it 

        cannot   be   taken   as   a   sine   qua   non   in   all   cases   that 

        whenever   there   is   a   writing   about   a   Mahomedan   gift   of 

        immovable   property   there   must   be   registration   thereof. 

        Whether the writing requires registration or not depends on 

        the facts and circumstances of each case."





29.             In   our   opinion,   merely   because   the     gift     is   reduced   to 


writing by a  Mohammadan instead of it having been made orally, such 


writing   does   not   become     a   formal   document     or     instrument   of   gift. 


When a gift   could be made by   Mohammadan  orally, its nature and 


character is not changed because of it having been made by a written 


document.  What is important for a valid gift under  Mohammadan Law 


is   that   three   essential   requisites   must   be   fulfilled.   The   form   is 


immaterial. If all the three essential requisites are satisfied constituting 




                                                                                        20



valid gift, the transaction of gift would not be rendered invalid because 


it has been written on a plain piece of paper.   The distinction that if a 


written deed of gift recites the factum of prior gift then such deed is not 


required   to   be   registered   but   when   the   writing   is   contemporaneous 


with the making of the gift, it must be registered, is inappropriate and 


does   not   seem   to   us   to   be     in   conformity   with   the   rule     of   gifts   in 


Mohammadan Law. 





30.            In   considering   what   is   the    Mohammadan  Law   on   the 


subject   of   gifts   inter   vivos,   the   Privy   Council   in  Mohammad   Abdul  


Ghani1  stated   that   when   the   old   and   authoritative   texts   of 


Mohammadan Law were promulgated there were not in contemplation 


of any one any Transfer of Property Acts, any Registration Acts, any 


Revenue   Courts   to   record   transfers   of   possession   of   land,   and   that 


could   not   have   been   intended   to   lay   down   for   all   time   what   should 


alone be the evidence that titles to lands had passed.  




 31.           
Section   129
   of   T.P.   Act   preserves   the   rule   of 


Mohammadan  Law  and   excludes   the   applicability     of   
Section  123
   of 


T.P. Act to a gift of an immovable property by a   Mohammadan.   We 


find   ourselves   in   express   agreement   with   the   statement   of   law 


reproduced   above   from   Mulla,   Principles   of   Mahomedan   Law   (19th 




                                                                                              21



Edition), page 120.   In other words, it is not the requirement that in all 


cases where the gift deed is contemporaneous   to the making of the 


gift   then   such   deed   must   be   registered   under   
Section   17
   of   the 


Registration Act.   Each case would depend on its own facts. 




32.           We are unable to concur with the view of the Full Bench of 


Andhra   Pradesh   High   Court   in   the   case   of  Tayyaba   Begum5.  We 


approve the view of the Calcutta High Court in   Nasib Ali3 that a deed 


of   gift   executed   by   a     Mohammadan   is   not   the   instrument   effecting, 


creating or making the gift but a mere piece of evidence, such writing 


is not a document of title but is a piece of evidence. 




33.           We also approve the view of the Gauhati High Court in the 


case of  Md. Hesabuddin10  .  The judgments to the contrary by Andhra 


Pradesh   High   Court,   Jammu   and   Kashmir   High   Court   and   Madras 


High Court do not lay down the correct law.





34.           Now, as regards the facts of the present case, the gift was 


made by Shaik Dawood by a written deed dated February 5, 1968 in 


favour   of   his   son  Mohammed  Yakub   in   respect   of   the   properties   `A' 


schedule and `B' schedule appended thereto.   The gift - as is recited 


in the deed - was based on love and affection for Mohammed Yakub 






                                                                                    22



as   after   the   death   of   donor's   wife,   he   has   been   looking   after   and 


helping him.   Can it be said that because a declaration is reduced to 


writing, it must have been registered?   We think not. The acceptance 


of the gift  by  Mohammed  Yakub   is also evidenced  as he signed  the 


deed.   Mohammed  Yakub was   residing in the `B' schedule property 


consisting   of   a   house   and   a   kitchen   room   appurtenant   thereto   and, 


thus, was in physical possession of residential house with the donor. 


The trial court on consideration of the entire evidence on record has 


recorded   a   categorical   finding   that   Shaik   Dawood   (donor),   executed 


the gift deed dated February 5, 1968 in favour of donee (Mohammed 


Yakub),   the donee accepted the gift and the donor handed over the 


properties   covered   by   the     gift   deed   to   the   donee.     The   trial   court 


further   held   that   all   the   three   essentials   of   a   valid   gift   under   the 


Mohammadan  Law   were   satisfied.     The   view   of   the   trial   court   is   in 


accord with the legal position stated by us above.   The gift deed dated 


February   5,   1968   is   a   form   of   declaration   by   the   donor   and   not   an 


instrument of gift as contemplated under 
Section 17
 of the Registration 


Act. As all the three essential requisites are satisfied by the gift deed 


dated   February   5,   1968,   the   gift   in   favour   of   defendant   2   became 


complete and irrevocable.  





                                                                                         23


35.           The High Court in the impugned judgment relied upon the 


Full   Bench     decision   in   the   case   of  Tayyaba   Begum5    but   we     have 


already held that the view of the Full Bench in Tayyaba Begum5 is not 


a correct view and does not lay down the correct law.




36.           Consequently, the appeal is allowed and the judgment and 


order dated September 13, 2004 passed by the High Court of Andhra 


Pradesh is set aside. The judgment and decree dated April 27, 1988 


passed   by   the   Principal,   Subordinate   Judge,   Vishakhapatnam   is 


restored. The parties shall bear their own costs.






                                                             ........................ J.



                                                                  (R.M. Lodha) 


                         


                                                           .......................... J.



                                                          (Surinder Singh Nijjar)




NEW DELHI.



MAY 5, 2011.      





                                                                                    24