Medical Council Of India vs J.Saai Prasanna & Ors. Etc. Etc on 9 May, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
2
, Cited by 
40
]










Top AI Tags


indian-medical-law






User Queries


internship completion


state medical register


\"imt\"


qualification


medical council of india


internship 


Recognized   filter:  Permitted mci


 MCI


state medical council


medical council


recognition










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Medical Council Of India vs J.Saai Prasanna & Ors. Etc. Etc on 9 May, 2011


Bench: 
A K Patnaik
, 
R V Raveendran


                                                        1



                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


           SPECIAL LEVE PETITION NOS.23641-23653 OF 2008





Medical Council of India                                             ... Petitioner


Vs.


J.Saai Prasanna & Ors. etc. etc.                                     ... Respondents





                                       O R D E R



       The Medical Council of India (`MCI' for short), the petitioner herein, 


challenges the order of the Andhra Pradesh High Court dated 2.5.2008 in  a 


batch   of   writ   petitions   filed   by   students   possessing   medical   qualifications 


from a foreign University, directing (i) MCI to grant provisional registration 


under   Section   25(1)   of   the   Indian   Medical   Council   Act,   1956   (`Act'   for 


short)   to   all   those   students   who   have   completed   the   screening   test   in 


accordance   with   the   provisions   of   section   13(4A)   of   the   Act   read   with 


Screening Tests Regulations, 2002 (`Screening Regulations' for short); and 



(ii)   MCI/State   Medical   Council,   as   the   case   may   be,   to   grant   permanent 


registration under section 25(4) and section 15 of the Act on the production 



                                            2




of valid certificates in proof of completion of compulsory internship for one 


year.



2.       The   private   respondents   are   students   who   claim   that   they   have 


completed   the   MBBS   course   in   International   Medical   and   Technological 


University   (`IMT   University'   for   short),   a   foreign   University   situated   in 


Tanzania.   The   said   university   was   established   in   Tanzania,   by   Vignan 


Education Foundation, an organization based in India. They fall under two 


categories. The first category  are those who underwent  the first two terms 


(Pre-clinical and Para clinical courses of 18 months each) between October 


1998 and May 2002 at Katuri Medical College and Hospital, Guntur (which 


was, at that point of time, an unrecognized medical college) and the last term 


(the   clinical   course   of   18   months)   at   Tanzania   between   June   2002   to 


November   2003/January   2004.   The   second   category   of   students   are   those 


who underwent the entire course of study at Tanzania.    



3.       All   these   students,   after   successful   completion   of   the   course, 


underwent   the   Screening   Test   conducted   by   the   National   Board   of 


Examinations   as   provided   under   the   Screening   Regulations.   Some   of   the 


students   were   declined   provisional   registration   and   therefore   could   not   do 


the   internship   in   India   and   obtain   permanent   registration.   Some   of   the 



                                               3




students were granted provisional registration, completed the internship, but 


were   declined   permanent   registration.   Some   students,   after   securing 


provisional   registration   and   completing   the   internship,   were   granted 


permanent registration, but subsequently their registrations were cancelled. 



They all approached the High Court of Andhra Pradesh for relief.



4.      The   said   petitions   were   resisted   by   MCI   primarily   on   the   following 


two grounds: (i) where an Indian student does any study in a medical college 


in   India,   established   without   the   permission   from   the   Central   Government 


under   Section   10A   of   the   Act,   is   automatically   disqualified   from   getting 


recognition   of   his   medical   degree,   even   if   such   degree   is   granted   by     a 


foreign University; and (ii) if a student's primary medical qualification is not 


a   recognized   qualification   for   enrolment   as   a   medical   practitioner   in   the 


country   in   which   the   Institution   granting   the   medical   qualification   is 


situated,   he   will   not   be   entitled   to   participate   in   the   screening   test 


examination. 



5.      The   High   Court,   after   exhaustive   consideration,   allowed   the   writ 


petitions   holding   that   the   writ   petitioners   fulfilled   the   requirements   of   the 


section 13(4A) of the Act and regulation (4) of the Screening Regulations, 



                                                4




that   is,   (i)   they   were   citizens   of   India,   (ii)   they   had   obtained   a   medical 


qualification   outside   India,   granted   by   a   medical   institution   (IMT 


University) in  Tanzania,  (iii)  the medical  qualification  granted   by  the  said 


medical institution in Tanzania is recognized for the purpose of enrolment as 


a medical practitioner in Tanzania, (iv) the Indian Embassy in Tanzania has 


confirmed   that   the   medical   qualification   granted   by   IMT   University, 


Tanzania  (which  granted  the medical  qualifications  to the writ  petitioners) 


was   a   recognized   qualification   for   enrolment   as   a   medical   practitioner   in 


Tanzania; and (v) the writ petitioners appeared and qualified in the screening 


test   conducted   by   National   Board   of   Examinations   in   India.   As   a 


consequence, the High Court held that the foreign medical qualification of 


the writ petitioners was deemed to be a recognized medical qualification for 


the   purpose   of   the   Act   and   that   subject   to   completion   of   the   required 


internship,   they   were   entitled   to   be   enrolled   on   the   medical   register 


maintained by any State Medical Council or to have their names entered in 


the Indian Medical Register.



6.      Section   13(4A)   of   the   Act   and   Regulation   4   of   the   Screening 


Regulations referred to in the decision are extracted below:  



                                             5


      "13.    Recognition   of   medical   qualification   granted   by   certain 

      medical institutions whose qualifications are not included in the 

      First or Second Schedule -





                              xxx                 xxx          xxx


      4A.     A  person   who  is  a  citizen   of India   and  obtains  medical 


      qualification granted by any medical institution in any country 

      outside India recognized  for enrolment as medical practitioner 

      in   that   country   after   such   date   as   may   be   specified   by   the 

      Central Government under sub-section (3), shall not be entitled 

      to be enrolled  on any Medical Register maintained  by a State 

      Medical   Council   or   to   have   his   name   entered   in   the   Indian 

      Medical   Registers   unless   he   qualifies   the   screening   te4st   in 

      India   prescribed   for   such   purpose   and   such   foreign   medical 

      qualification after such person qualifies the said screening test 

      shall be deemed to be the recognized medical qualification for 

      the purposes of this Act for that person."





Regulation 4 of the screening Regulations as it originally stood is extracted 


below:



      "4. Eligibility Criteria - No person shall be allowed to appear in 

      the screening test unless :





      (i)     he/she   is   a   citizen   of   India   either   whose   name   and   the 

              institution   awarding   it   are   included   in   the   World 

              Directory   of   Medical   Schools,   published   by   the   world 

              Health   organization,   or   and   possesses   any   primary 

              medical  qualification,  which  is  confirmed   by  the  Indian 

              Embassy  concerned to be a recognized  qualification for 

              enrolment as medical practitioner in the country in which 

              the institution awarding the said qualification is situated;



      (ii)    He/she   had   obtained   `Eligibility   Certificate'   from   the 

      Medical Council of India as per the `Eligibility Requirement for 

      taking   admissions   in   an   undergraduate   medical   course   in   a 

      Foreign   Medical   Institution   Regulations,   2001'.   This 



                                             6




        requirement shall not be necessary in respect of India citizens, 

        who   have   acquired   the   medical   qualifications   from   foreign 

        medical   institutions   or   have   obtained   admission   in   foreign 

        medical institution before 15th March, 2002."   

           





7.      The High Court by the impugned judgment elaborately considered the 


various issues with reference to section 13(4A) of the Act and Regulation 4 


of the Screening Regulations, and answered the questions of law as under: 



(i)     When the Parliament chose  to treat all Indian citizens  who obtained 


medical qualification from abroad as one category, there is no scope to resort 


to classifying those who underwent part of the course in Indian institutions 


as a separate category.





(ii)    Medical   qualification   granted   by   IMT   University,   Tanzania,   is 


recognized   for   enrolment   as   a   medical   practitioner   in   Tanzania   and   it   is 


neither   specifically   nor   impliedly   excluded   from   the   purview   of   Section 


13(4A) of the Act.





(ii)    Once   a   Medical   Graduate   of   a   foreign   university   qualifies   the 


screening   test,   the   primary   medical   qualification   acquired   by   such   person 


from the  medical   institution   abroad   is  deemed to  be   a  recognized   medical 


qualification for the purposes of the Act. Such person cannot be denied grant 


of permanent/provisional registration.





                                                7


On   a   careful   consideration   of   the   facts   and   the   legal   position,   we   find   no 


error   in   the   impugned   judgment   of   the   High   Court.   The   special   leave 


petitions are therefore liable to be dismissed.



8.      MCI   contends   that   where   student   of  a  foreign   University   undergo   a 


part   of   his   training   in   an   Institution   in   India   which   has   not   obtained   the 


permission   from   the   Central   Government/MCI,   as   required   under   section 


10A   of   the   Act,   such   students   are   not   eligible   for   registration   as   medical 


practitioners   in   India.   The   requirements   for   recognition   of   a   medical 


qualification granted by a medical institution outside India are different from 


requirements for recognition of medical qualification granted by Universities 


or medical institutions in India. It is no doubt true that if a student in India, 


does a course of study in medicine in a medial college in India which does 


not have the permission of the Central Government under Section 10A of the 


Act, the medical qualification granted to any student of that college will not 


be   a   recognized   medical   qualification   for   the   purposes   of   the   Act   and 


consequently   such   student   will   not   be   entitled   to   be   enrolled   in   the   India 


Medical   Register   or   State   Medical   Register.   But   medical   qualifications 


granted   by   medical   institutions   outside   India   are   dealt   within   a   special 


provision, that is Section 13(4A) of the Act. Necessarily, for examining the 



                                               8




validity of the medical qualification granted by a medical institution in any 


country outside India, the norms and tests of the country where the medical 


institution is situated, will have to be fulfilled for recognition of the degree 


in   that   country   and   the   norms   that   are   prescribed   by   the   
Indian   Medial 


Council   Act,   1956
   in   regard   to   Indian   medical   institutions   will   have   no 


relevance. So long as the medical institutions in a country outside India has 


granted  a medial  qualification  and that medical  qualification  is  recognized 


for enrolment as medical practitioner in that country, all that is required for 


the purpose of enrolment in the medical register in India is qualifying in the 


screening   test   in   India.   In   the   case   of   persons   who   obtained   a   medical 


qualification in a medical institution outside India, the question as to where 


the course of study was undergone is not relevant. The course of study could 


be in that country or if the norms of the Medical Council of that country so 


permitted, the course of study could be partly in that country and partly in 


another   country   including   India.   Once   that   country   recognizes   a   medical 


qualification   granted   by   the   institution   in   that   country   for   the   purpose   of 


enrolment as a medical practitioner in that country, and such medical degree 


holder passes the screening test in India, the Medical Council of India can 


not refuse to recognize such degree on the ground that the student did a part 


of   his   study   in   an   Institution   in   India   as   a   part   of   his   medical   study 



                                              9




programme   for   the   foreign   institution.   As   stated   above,   as   far   as   the 


provisions of the Act at the relevant point of time, all that was required for 


an Indian citizen holding a medical qualification from a foreign country for 


being   enrolled   in   the   medical   register   was   that   he   should   qualify   in   the 


screening   test   in   India.   Therefore,   the   fact   that   such   a   medical   graduate 


underwent a part of the medical course of a foreign university, in an Indian 


college which was not recognized in India, will not be relevant.



9.      Learned counsel for the MCI submitted that unscrupulous operators in 


India   may   commence   and   conduct   courses   in   unauthorized   institutions   in 


India and make the students take their examination in a foreign country to 


secure   a   degree   outside   India   and  thereafter   flood   India   with   inadequately 


and improperly educated Medical graduates, by appearing and passing in the 


screening   test.   This   apprehension   is   without   any   basis   as   the   Screening 


Regulations   have   now   been   amended   by   the   Screening   Test   Regulations 


(Amendment), 2010 whereby clause (3) has been added in 
Regulation 4
 to 


the following effect: 



        "(3)   He/she   has   studied   for   the   medical   course   at   the   same 

        institute   located   abroad   for   the   entire   duration   of   the   course 

        from where he/she has obtained the degree."





                                             10


10.    The second contention of MCI is also untenable. It is true that if the 


primary   medical   qualification   of   the   candidate   was   not   a   recognized 


qualification for enrolment as medical  practitioner  in the country in which 


the   institution   awarding   the   said   qualification   is   situated,   such   candidates 


will  not entitled  to take part  in the screening test  examination  in India.  In 


this   case   the   High   Commission   of   India   in   Tanzania   has   confirmed   the 


following: (i) that Tanzania Medical Council has recognized the curriculum 


and   medical   degree   of   MBBS   of   International   Medical   &   Technological, 


University   Dar   es   Salaam,   Tanzania   as   equivalent   to   MD   degree   in 


Tanzania; and (ii) that the medical degrees offered to the said International 


Medical   & Technological  University,  Tanzania   are  recognized   by  Medical 


Council   of   Tanzania   and   the   MBBS   graduates   of   the   said   university   are 


eligible for registration as Medical practitioners by the Medical Council of 


Tanzania under the provisions of the Medical Practitioners & Dentists Act, 


Cap 152 of the Laws of Tanzania. Therefore, the question of such primary 


degree   not   being   recognized   in   India   for   the   purpose   of   sitting   in   the 


screening test examination does not arise.



11.    In the circumstances, we find no reason to interfere with the judgment 


of the High Court. We may, however, refer to an apprehension expressed by 



                                              11




the   learned   counsel   for   the   MCI.   He   submitted   that   these   petitioners   have 


completed the course in 2003-2004 and many had undergone the screening 


test in 2005 and they have not been practicing thereafter and therefore their 


knowledge is likely to be rusted. This court had put a query to the MCI on 


12.8.2010  as   to  whether   MCI  will  be  willing  to  consider  the  case  of  such 


students,   for   permanent   registration   on   undergoing   a   special   package   of 


internship. Learned counsel for MCI, on instructions, submitted that if this 


Court upholds the judgment of the High Court, then the writ petitioners may 


be required to undergo three separate papers of pre-clinical, para-clinical and 


clinical medicine, each of 100 marks and thereafter again undergo a separate 


internship. As the Screening Regulations provide for a single paper, and all 


the   writ   petitioners   have   successfully   completed   the   screening   test,   the 


students need not be required to pass three special papers again. However, in 


view   of   the   long   gap   from   the   completion   of   the   course,   even   those   who 


have   completed   their  internship  will  have   to  undergo  internship  afresh  for 


one   year   to   obtain   permanent   registration.   On   the   other   hand,   those   who 


have   not   done   the   internship   in   pursuance   of   the   provisional   registration 


shall   be   entitled   to   undergo   the   internship   now   and   then   seek   permanent 


registration.   To   ensure   that   the   students   undergo   such   internship   after 


provisional registration, the students concerned shall inform the MCI about 



                                               12




commencement and completion of internship.



12.     It is stated that some students, that is respondents 1 and 2 in SLP (C) 


No.23652/2008   and   respondent   No.3   in   SLP   (C)   No.23653/2008,   have 


undergone the entire course in Tanzania and fall under the second category. 



They   have   been   granted   provisional   registration   and   completed   their 


internship. They are entitled to permanent registration.  Learned counsel for 


MCI   fairly   submitted   that   MCI   does   not   challenge   the   order   of   the   High 


Court in regard to such students.



13.     Subject   to   the   requirement   that   the   first   category   students   should 


undergo a fresh internship of one year in view of the long gap from the date 


of   the   degree   and   internship,   these   special   leave   petitions   are   dismissed, 


upholding the decision of the High Court.



14.     All   applications   for   impleadment   by   the   similarly   situated   students 


(that is persons having medical degree from IMT University who have done 


the complete course at Tanzania) or part of the course in India and remaining 


part   in   Tanzania   are   allowed.   They   will   be   entitled   to   similar   reliefs   as 


granted above.




                 13






                       ..................................J.

                       (R V Raveendran)





New Delhi;             .................................J.

May 09, 2011.          (A K Patnaik)