Prakash Kadam & Etc. Etc vs Ramprasad Vishwanath Gupta & Anr on 13 May, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
7
, Cited by 
141
]










Top AI Tags


common-intention


murder


criminal-conspiracy


kidnapping-abducting-for-murder


land-acquisition-law






User Queries


fake encounter 


police encounter


encounter


bail granted


markandey katju


bail cancel,


abduction 


contract killers


  police constables


conspiracy


"prima facie case"


"markandey katju"


suryavanshi


prima facie case


pandurang 










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Prakash Kadam & Etc. Etc vs Ramprasad Vishwanath Gupta & Anr on 13 May, 2011


Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 1945, 2011 AIR SCW 3113, 2011 (3) AIR JHAR R 648, 2011 CRI. L. J. 3585, AIR 2011 SC( CRI) 1452, 2011 (4) AIR BOM R 297, (2011) 2 UC 1361, (2011) 3 GUJ LR 2237, (2011) 4 MAD LJ(CRI) 679, (2011) 2 RAJ LW 1833, (2011) 3 RECCRIR 1, 2011 (6) SCC 189, (2011) 4 BOMCR(CRI) 123, (2011) 2 DLT(CRL) 696, (2011) 4 CHANDCRIC 58, 2011 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 536, (2011) 2 CURCRIR 386, (2011) 6 SCALE 236, (2012) 1 CGLJ 322, (2011) 102 ALLINDCAS 52 (SC), (2011) 73 ALLCRIC 917, 2011 CRILR(SC&MP) 536, (2011) 2 KER LJ 18, (2011) 2 CRIMES 279, (2011) 49 OCR 589, (2011) 1 CRILR(RAJ) 536, (2011) 2 ALD(CRL) 268, 2011 (2) SCC (CRI) 848, 2011 (87) ALR SOC 2 (SC)


Author: 
Markandey Katju


Bench: 
Gyan Sudha Misra
, 
Markandey Katju


                                                                                     1


                                                         REPORTABLE


                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


           CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1174-1178_OF 2011

         [Arising out of SLP((Criminal) Nos. 3865-69 of 2011]





Prakash Kadam & etc. etc.                          ..    Appellants


     -versus-


Ramprasad Vishwanath Gupta & Anr.                  ..    Respondents




                             J U D G M E N T



Markandey Katju, J.



     A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;



     Domestic fury and fierce civil strife

     Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;



     Blood and destruction shall be so in use

     And dreadful objects so familiar

     That mothers shall but smile when they behold

     Their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;



     All pity choked with custom of fell deeds:



     And Caesar's spirit, ranging for revenge,

     With Ate by his side come hot from hell,

     Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice

     Cry "Havoc!" and let slip the dogs of war;



     That this foul deed shall smell above the earth

     With carrion mean, groaning for burial.



                         -- (Shakespeare: Julius Caesar Act 3 Scene 1)



                                                                                         2


1.        Leave granted.  Heard learned counsel for the appellants and perused 


the record.



2.        This case reveals to what grisly depths our society has descended.



3.        This appeal has been filed against the impugned judgment and order 


dated   21.1.2011   passed   by   the   High   Court   of   Judicaure   at   Bombay   in 


Criminal Application Nos. 5283-5285 and 5303-5304 of 2010  by which the 


High Court has cancelled the bail granted to the appellants by the Sessions 


Court.



4.        The appellants are policemen accused of a contract killing in Sessions 


Case   No.   317/2010   which   is   pending   before   the   Sessions   Judge,   Greater 


Bombay.   The appellants have been charge-sheeted for offences punishable 


under 
Sections 302
/
34
,
120-B
, 
364
/
34
 IPC and other minor offences.     The 


victim of the offence is deceased Ramnaryan Gupta @ Lakhanbhaiyya.  The 


prosecution case is that the appellants were engaged as contract killers by a 


private person to eliminate the deceased.



5.        The case of the prosecution in brief is that the deceased Ramnarayan 


Gupta   and   the  accused   No.  14,   Janardan   Bhange   were,   once   upon  a   time, 



                                                                                                 3



very close to each other.   Both of them had been working as estate agents 


and, mainly their business was to purchase land from the farmers whose land 


has been acquired by the Government under the 
Land Acquisition Act
 and to 


whom 12 percent of the land was given by the Government.  This 12 percent 


of   the   land   was   being   purchased   at   meager   price   by   the   deceased   and 


accused No. 14, Janardan Bhange and was being sold on premium at later 


stage.  During the course of that business, both of them had been exchanging 


the files pending with them for disposal pertaining to the said land.



6.      There   were   some   differences   between   the   deceased   Ramnarayan 


Gupta and accused No. 14, Janardan and hence it is alleged that the accused 


Janardan   decided   to   eliminate   the   deceased   in   a   false   police   encounter. 



Hence,   he   hired   the   services   of   the   accused,   and   in   pursuance   of   the   said 


conspiracy the deceased Ramnarayan Gupta and his friend Anil Bheda were 


abducted   on   11.11.2006   from   near   a   shop   named   Trisha   Collections   at 


Vashi,   New   Bombay   by   4   or   5   well-built   persons   who   appeared   to   be 


policemen   and   were   forcibly   bundled   into   a   Qualis   car.   The   complainant, 


brother   of   the   deceased,   sent   telegrams   and   fax   messages   to   different 


authorities   complaining   that   the   said   two   persons   had   been   abducted   by 


some persons who appeared to be policemen and were in danger of losing 


their lives.  



                                                                                                   4


7.      It is alleged that at Bhandup Complex the deceased was shifted to an 


Innova vehicle.   The deceased and witness Anil Bheda were taken to D.N. 


Nagar police station in two separate vehicles  i.e. one Qualis and the other 


Innova.    It   is  alleged  that  the  deceased   was killed  and   his   dead  body  was 


thrown near Nana-Nani Park at Versova.   The dead body, after some time, 


was   collected   from   the   said   place   by   the   police   to   create   a   false   case   of 


police   encounter.     A   case   vide   C.R.   No.   302/2006   was   registered   on 


11.11.2006 at Versova  Police  Station  against deceased  Ramnarayan  Gupta 


on the complaint made by accused No. 9.   In the said FIR it was shown that 


accused No. 9 and other police officers had gone to Nana-Nani Park on the 


basis   of   certain   information   and   that   the   deceased   was   asked   to   surrender 


before   the   police.     Instead   of  surrendering   before   the   police,   the   deceased 


had attempted to kill the police and in retaliation he was shot by them.



8.      It   is   also   alleged   that   witness   Anil   Bheda   was   initially   detained   at 


D.N. Nagar Police Station and thereafter he was taken to Kolhapur and he 


was further detained at Mid Town Hotel at Andheri.    As such the witness 


Anil   Bheda   was   in   custody   of   the   police   for   about   one   month   from 


11.11.2006.  His wife had lodged a missing complaint at Vashi police station 


on the same day, but she was compelled to withdraw that complaint.



                                                                                                      5


9.      The   complainant   is   the   brother   of   the   deceased   and   is   a   practicing 


advocate.     He   came   to   know   within   a   few   minutes   of   the   incident   of 


abduction   of   his   brother.     He,   therefore,   along   with   advocate   Mr.   Ganesh 


Ayyer, started searching for his brother and in the meantime he had also sent 


telegrams to Police Commissioner of Thane, Mumbai and New Bombay of 


the   alleged   abduction   of   his   brother   and   indicated   apprehension   that   his 


brother would be eliminated in a false police encounter.   On the same day it 


was flashed on T.V. channels that the deceased had been killed in a police 


encounter.     The   complainant,   therefore,   approached   the   High   Court   on 


15.11.2006 by filing a writ petition (WP 2473/2006) to get directions from 


the   High   Court   to   the   police   to   register   a   case   in   respect   of   death   of   his 


brother.



10.     On the aforesaid writ petition the High Court on 13.2.2008 passed an 


order that  the offence of murder be registered against the accused.   During 


the   investigation   the   statement   of   Anil   Bheda   and   other   witnesses   were 


recorded.  So far, the police have charge-sheeted 19 accused. 



11.     After   the   High   Court   by   its   order   dated   13.2.2008   had   directed   the 


Metropolitan Magistrate, Railway Mobile Court, Andheri to make an inquiry 



                                                                                                6



under   
Section   176(1A)
   Cr.P.C.,   the   Metropolitan   Magistrate   after   holding 


the inquiry submitted a report dated 11.8.2008 that Ramnarayan Gupta was 


shot by the police when he was in police custody.  The report also stated that 


the death had not taken place at the spot alleged by the police, and that the 


deceased had not disappeared from the police custody before he was done to 


death,   but   that   the   deceased   was   abducted   by   the   police.     The   report   also 


held that a false FIR was lodged by accused No. 9 Police Inspector Pradip 


Suryavanshi   of  D.N.   Nagar  Police   Sttion   to  show   that   Ramnarayan   Gupta 


was killed in a police encounter at Nana-Nani Park, and this FIR was filed to 


cover up the murder of the deceased Ramnarayan Gupta.



12.     After   the   inquiry   report   was   submitted   by   the   Metropolitan 


Magistrate, the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court by its order dated 


13.8.2009   in   the   aforesaid   criminal   writ   petition   constituted   a   Special 


Investigation  Team   for investigation  of this  case.    Mr. K.M.M. Prasanna, 


DCP, Mumbai City, was appointed as head of the investigation team, and he 


was   directed   to   record   the   statement   of   the   complainant   and   to   treat   that 


statement as the FIR.   Copy of the order of the Bombay High Court dated 


13.8.2009 is Annexure P-3 to this appeal.   Accordingly, the statement of the 


complainant   was   recorded   on   20.8.2009   which   was   treated   as   the   FIR 


(Annexure   P4   to   this   appeal)   and   investigation   was   carried   out.     The 



                                                                                            7



statement and supplementary statement  of Anil Bheda, which corroborates 


the prosecution case, is Annexure P5 to this appeal.



13.      During   investigation,   it   was   revealed   that   accused   No.1   Police 


Inspector   Pradip   Sharma   (who   is   described   as   an   `encounter   specialist'), 


accused   No.9   -   PI   Pradip   Suryawanshi   and   accused   No.   14   -   Janardan 


Bhanage, had entered into a conspiracy to eliminate Ramnarayan Gupta. It 


appears   that   accused   No.14   Janardan   Bhanage   had   some   personal   enmity 


with Ramnarayan Gupta.  Thereafter other officers and some criminals were 


involved in the execution of the said conspiracy. Accused No.4 - Shailendra 


Pande , accused No.5 - Hitesh Solanki, accused N0.6 - Akil Khan, accused 


No.8   -   Manoj   Mohan   Raj,   accused   No.12   -   Mohd.   Moiddin   and   accused 


No.21 - Suresh Shetty and accused  No.7 police constable Vinayak Shinde 


had   abducted   Ramnarayan   Gupta   and   Anil   Bheda   from   Vashi,   on 


11.11.2006.     Accused   No.1   PI   Pradip   Sharma,   accused   No.2   Police 


Constable   Tanaji   Desai,   accused   No.9   P.I.   Pradip   Suryavanshi,   accused 


No.15   API   -   Dilip   Palande   were   the   persons   who   actually   fired   and   shot 


dead the deceased. Accused No.11 API Nitin Satape and accused no.22 PSI 


Arvind   Sarvankar   claimed   to   have   fired   during   the   encounter,   though   the 


bullets fired from their fire arms were not recovered. Accused Nos. 13,16, 


17, 18 and 19, whose bail orders were cancelled by the High Court, are said 



                                                                                               8



to   be   the   members   of   the   team   which   shot   him   dead.   Accused   No.13 


Devidas  Sakpal  had  allegedly   guarded   Anil  Bheda  at  Hotel  Mid   Town  on 


certain   occasions   and   accused   No.16   Head   Constable   Prakash   Kadam   had 


joined   the   abductors   at   about   4.30   p.m.   and   since   then   he   was   with   Anil 


Bheda.   He   was   also   with   Anil   Bheda   when   he   was   taken   out   from 


D.N.Nagar   Police   Station   in   the   evening   and   also   later   on   at   Hotel   Mid 


Town from time to time.



14.     On behalf of the prosecution, it is pointed out that in the FIR lodged 


by P.I. Pradip Suryavanshi showing the killing of Ramnarayan Gupta in an 


encounter   at   Nana-Nani   Park,   he   had   given   names   of   police   officers   and 


police staff, who were in that team.  The names of accused Nos.13,16, 17, 18 


and 19 are shown in the said FIR.   On that basis an entry was made in the 


station diary, where also the names of these persons were shown. It is also 


pointed out that in the magisterial enquiry, which was initially directed by 


the Police Commissioner, these persons had claimed to be members of the 


encounter   team.   When   the   complainant   filed   the   Writ   Petition   against   the 


State   for   taking   action   against   the   culprits,   some   of   these   persons   had 


appeared to contest the writ petition. After the writ petition was allowed and 


this   Court   directed   investigation,   accused   Nos.   13,   16,   19   and   20   filed 


Special   Leave   Petition   challenging   that   order,   which   was   dismissed. 



                                                                                                 9


Everywhere they had taken the plea that Ramnarayan Gupta was shot dead 


in an encounter and that they were members of the Police team involved in 


that   encounter   and   were  also   present   at   the   time  of  the   alleged  encounter. 



The learned Counsel also pointed out that there is sufficient material to show 


that these persons were involved in the commission of the crime.



15.     The   Sessions   Court   granted   bail   to   the   appellants   but   that   has   been 


cancelled by the High Court by the impugned judgment.



16.     It was contended by learned counsel for the appellants before us, and 


it   was   also   contended   before   the   High   Court,   that   the   considerations   for 


cancellation of bail is different from the consideration of grant of bail vide 


Bhagirathsinh   s/o  Mahipat  Singh  Judeja  vs.  State  of  Gujarat  (
1984)  1 


SCC 284, Dolat Ram and others vs. State of Haryana
 (1995) 1 SCC 349 


and Ramcharan vs. Sta
                                te of M.P.   (2004) 13 SCC 617.




17.     However, we are of the opinion that that is not an absolute rule, and it 


will   depend   on   the   facts   and   circumstances   of   the   case.     In   considering 


whether   to   cancel   the   bail   the   Court   has   also   to   consider   the   gravity   and 


nature of the offence, prima facie case against the accused, the position and 


standing of the accused, etc.  If there are very serious allegations against the 



                                                                                                     10



accused his bail may be cancelled even if he has not misused the bail granted 


to him.   Moreover, the above principle applies when the  same  Court which 


granted bail is approached for canceling the bail.  It will not apply when the 


order granting bail is appealed against before an appellate/revisional Court.



18.      In our opinion, there is no absolute rule that once bail is granted to the 


accused then it can only be cancelled if there is likelihood of misuse of the 


bail.   That factor, though no doubt important, is not the only factor.   There 


are several other factors also which may be seen while deciding to cancel the 


bail.



19.      This is a very serious case and cannot be treated like an ordinary case. 



The   accused   who   are   policemen   are   supposed   to   uphold   the   law,   but   the 


allegation   against   them   is   that   they   functioned   as   contract   killers.     Their 


version   that   Ramnarayan   Gupta   was   shot   in   a   police   encounter   has   been 


found to be false during the investigation.  It is true that we are not deciding 


the   case   finally   as   that   will   be   done   by   the   trial   court   where   the   case   is 


pending,   but   we   can   certainly   examine   the   material   on   record   in   deciding 


whether   there   is   a   prima   facie   case   against   the   accused   which   disentitles 


them to bail.  



                                                                                                       11


20.     Accused   No.   11   API   Nitin   Sartape,   accused   No.17   PSI   Ganesh 


Harpude, and accused No.19 PSI Pandurang Kokam, who were attached to 


Versova Police Station, as per the station diary entry 33 of Versova Police 


Station left Versova Police Station to go to D.N.Nagar Police Station on a 


special   assignment.   That   entry   No.33   was   taken   in   the   station   diary   of 


Versova Police  Station at 18.05 hours. Entry No.25 in the station diary of 


D.N.Nagar   Police   Station   at   18.55   hrs.   shows   that   Police   Inspector 


Suryavanshi,   API   Dilip   Palande   (accused   No.15),   PSI   Arvind   Sarvankar 


(accused   No.22),   PSI   Patade   (accused   No.18)   and   API   Sartape   (accused 


No.11), PSI Harpude (accused No.17) and Police Constable Batch No.26645 


i.e.   Pandurang   Kokam   (accused   No.19)   left   the   Police   Station   to   go   near 


Nani Nani Park to verify and to arrest a hardened criminal. It appears that 3 


police   officers   i.e.   AP   Sartape,   PSI   Harpude   and   Constable   Pandurang 


Kokam were specially called from the Versova Police Station and they were 


in the team of the police officers and staff who accompanied PI Suryavanshi. 



This   team   left   the   police   station   at   18.55   hrs.   as   per   the   said   entry   and   it 


appears   that   at   about   8   to   8.15   p.m.   Ramnarayan   was   shot   dead.   At   this 


stage,   the   defence   of   the   accused   need   not   be   taken   into   consideration, 


because   during   the   investigation,   it   has   been   found   that   there   was   no 


encounter and Ramnarayan Gupta was shot dead in a fake encounter. This 



                                                                                                   12



station   diary   No.25   of   18.55   hrs.   goes   to   show   that   accused   No.17   PSI 


Hapude, accused No.18 PSI Patade and accused No.19 Constable Pandurang 


Kokam were the members of the team which killed Ramnarayan. Not only 


this, as per the record of D.N.Nagar Police station, on 11.11.2006, at 6 p.m. 


Police   Inspector   Suryavanshi,   API   Sartape   and   PSI   Anand   Patade   had 


collected weapons and ammunition. Naturally, those weapons were collected 


by the said officers to go to some place for a mission. According to them, 


they   went   to   at   Nana   Nani   Park   where   Ramnarayan   Gupta   was   killed.   In 


view of this, the presence of PSI Patade in the team which executed the said 


plan and killed Ramnarayan does not appear to be in doubt. Merely because 


accused   No.18   PSI   Patade   himself   did   not   fire   is   not   sufficient.   Accused 


Nos. 17 Ganesh Harpude and accused No.19 Pandurang Kokam, as pointed 


out above, were also members of that team. It is also material to note that 


these accused persons had consistently taken a stand that they were present 


at   the   time   of   the   said   encounter   and   this   is   clear   from   their   stand   taken 


before the High Court as well as before the Supreme Court in Special Leave 


Petition filed by the accused Nos. 13, 16, 19 and 21. In that SLP also they 


had   stated   that   accused   Nos.   17   and   18   were   also   in   the   encounter   team. 



Hence there is a prima facie case against them.



                                                                                              13


21.    As   far   as   accused   Nos.   16,   17,   18   and   19   are   concerned,   there   is 


sufficient material to prima facie establish their role in this conspiracy and 


the alleged execution of Ramnarayan Gupta. Accused No.13 was allegedly 


given duty of guarding Anil Bheda at Hotel Mid Town where he was being 


detained illegally. It is contended by the learned Counsel for the accused that 


if any duty of guarding or surveillance is given to a Police Constable by his 


superiors,   he   is   bound   to   discharge   that   duty   and   merely   because   he   was 


given   the   guarding   duty,   it   cannot   be   said   that   he   was   party   to   the 


conspiracy. However, it  cannot be forgotten that accused No.13 was one of 


the   petitioners   before   the   Supreme   Court   and   had   claimed   that   he   was   a 


member   of  the encounter   team along  with PI  Suryavanshi   and  others,  and 


this admission finds corroboration from the contents of the FIR registered by 


PI Suryavanshi himself.



22.    In   fact,   the   prosecution   material   collected   during   the   investigation 


prima facie indicates that Ramnarayan Gupta was abducted during the day 


time and was taken to D.N.Nagar Police Station and from there he was taken 


to   some   unknown   place   where   he   was   shot   dead.     At   9   p.m.   some   police 


officers   came   back   to   the   police   station   and   deposited   their   weapons   and 


kept their blood stained clothes.



                                                                                                     14


23.     In our opinion this  is a very  serious  case  wherein  prima  facie  some 


police officers and staff were engaged by some private persons to kill their 


opponent i.e. Ramnarayan Gupta and the police officers and the staff acted 


as contract killers for them. If such police officers and staff can be engaged 


as   contract   killers   to   finish   some   person,   there   may   be   very   strong 


apprehension   in   the   mind   of   the   witnesses   about   their   own   safety.   If   the 


police officers and staff could kill a person at the behest of a third person, it 


cannot   be   ruled   out   that   they   may   kill   the   important   witnesses   or   their 


relatives   or   give   threats   to   them   at   the   time   of   trial   of   the   case   to   save 


themselves. This aspect has been completely ignored by the learned Sessions 


Judge while granting bail to the accused persons.



24.     In our opinion, the High Court was perfectly justified in canceling the 


bail to the accused-appellants.   The accused/appellants are police personnel 


and it was their duty to uphold the law, but far from performing their duty, 


they appear to have operated as criminals.  Thus, the protectors have become 


the predators.   As the Bible says "If the salt has lost its flavour, wherewith 


shall it be salted?", or as the ancient Romans used to say,"Who will guard 


the Praetorian guards?" (see in this connection the judgment of this Court in 


CBI    vs.    Kishore   Singh,   Criminal   Appeal   Nos.2047-2049   decided   on 


25.10.2010).



                                                                                                15


25.     We   are   of   the   view   that   in   cases   where   a   fake   encounter   is   proved 


against policemen in a trial, they must be given death sentence, treating it as 


the   rarest   of   rare   cases.     Fake   `encounters'   are   nothing   but   cold   blooded, 


brutal   murder   by   persons   who   are   supposed   to   uphold   the   law.     In   our 


opinion   if   crimes   are   committed   by   ordinary   people,   ordinary   punishment 


should be given, but if the offence is committed by policemen much harsher 


punishment should be given to them because they do an act totally contrary 


to their duties.



26.     We   warn   policemen   that   they   will   not   be   excused   for   committing 


murder in the name of `encounter' on the pretext that they were carrying out 


the   orders   of   their   superior   officers   or   politicians,   however   high.     In   the 


Nuremburg   trials   the   Nazi   war   criminals   took   the   plea   that   `orders   are 


orders', nevertheless they were hanged.   If a policeman is given an illegal 


order by any superior to do a fake `encounter', it is his duty to refuse to carry 


out such illegal order, otherwise he will be charged for murder, and if found 


guilty   sentenced   to   death.     The   `encounter'   philosophy   is   a   criminal 


philosophy,   and   all   policemen   must   know   this.     Trigger   happy   policemen 


who think they can kill people in the name of `encounter' and get away with 


it should know that the gallows await them.      



                                                                                                16


27.     For the above reasons, these appeals are dismissed.



28.     Before   parting   with   this   case,   it   is   imperative   in   our   opinion   to 


mention   that  our  ancient   thinkers   were  of  the   view   that   the   worst   state   of 


affairs possible  in society is a state of lawlessness.   When the rule of law 


collapses it is replaced by Matsyanyaya, which means the law of the jungle. 



In Sanskrit the word `Matsya' means fish, and Matsyanyaya means a state of 


affairs where the big fish devours the smaller one.  All our ancient thinkers 


have   condemned   Matsyanyaya   vide   `History   of   Dharmashastra'   by   P.V. 


Kane   Vol.   III   p.   21.     A   glimpse   of   the   situation   which   will   prevail   if 


matsyanyaya comes into existence is provided by Mark Antony's speech in 


Shakespeare's `Julius Caesar' quoted at the beginning of this judgment.  



29.     This idea of matsyanyaya (the maxim of the larger fish devouring the 


smaller ones or the strong despoiling the weak) is frequently dwelt upon by 


Kautilya,   the Mahabharata and other works.   It can be traced back to the 


Shatapatha Brahmana XI 1.6.24 where it is said "whenever there is drought, 


then the stronger seizes upon the weaker, for the waters are the law," which 


means   that   when   there   is   no   rain   the   reign   of   law   comes   to   an   end   and 


matsyanyaya beings to operate.



                                                                                                    17


30.     Kautilya says, `if danda be not employed, it gives rise to the condition 


of   matsyanyaya,   since   in   the   absence   of   a   chastiser   the   strong   devour   the 


weak'.   That in the absence of a king (arajaka) or when there is no fear of 


punishment,   the   condition   of   matsyanyaya   follows   is   declared   by   several 


works such as the Ramayana II, CH. 67, Shantiparva of Mahabharat 15.30 


and   67,16.     Kamandaka   II.     40,   Matsyapurana   225.9,   Manasollasa   II. 



20.1295 etc.






31.     Thus in the Shanti Parva of Mahabharat Vol. 1 it is stated:-



        "Raja chen-na bhavellokey prithivyaam dandadharakah

        Shuley matsyanivapakshyan durbalaan balvattaraah"



32.     This shloka means that when the King carrying the rod of punishment 


does not protect the earth then the strong persons destroy the weaker ones, 


just   like   in   water   the   big   fish   eat   the   small   fish.     In   the   Shantiparva   of 


Mahabharata Bheesma Pitamah tells Yudhishthir that there is nothing worse 


in the world than lawlessness, for in a state of Matsyayaya, nobody, not even 


the evil doers are safe, because  even the evil doers will sooner or later be 


swallowed up by other evil doers.



                                                                                         18


33.    We have referred to this because  behind the growing lawlessness  in 


the country this Court can see the looming danger of matsyanyaya.



34.    The appeals are dismissed, but it is made clear that the trial court will 


decide   the   criminal   case   against   the   appellants   uninfluenced   by   any 


observations   made   in   this   judgment,   or   in   the   impugned   judgment   of   the 


High Court.



                                                     .................................J.

                                                     (Markandey Katju)




                                                     .................................J.

                                                     (Gyan Sudha Misra)

New Delhi;



13th May, 2011