Jt.Action Commit.Of Airlines ... vs Director General Of Civil Aviation & Ors on 3 May, 2011








Share Link


Mobile View












Free features


Premium features


Case removal






















Warning on translation






Get this document in PDF








Print it on a file/printer








Download Court Copy














[Cites 
23
, Cited by 
32
]










User Queries


executive instruction


dgca


estoppel


subordinate legislation


airlines


aircraft act 1934


statutory rules


cag


suspension


b.s.chauhan


expert committee


statutory authority


reprobate


formulation


Aviation  


website










Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Supreme Court of India


Jt.Action Commit.Of Airlines ... vs Director General Of Civil Aviation & Ors on 3 May, 2011


Author: 
B.S. Chauhan


Bench: 
B.S. Chauhan
, 
P. Sathasivam


                                                                               Reportable


            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF  INDIA

             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                  Civil Appeal No3844 of 2011

           (Arising out of SLP(C) No.27814 of 2008)





The Joint Action Committee of Airlines 

Pilots Associations of India & Ors.                          ..Appellants 


                                   Versus


The Director General of

Civil Aviation & Ors.                                            ..Respondents





                             J U D G M E N T



Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN, J.



1.     Leave granted. 



2.     This appeal has been preferred against the judgment and order 


       dated   14.8.2008   passed   by   the   High   Court   of   Judicature   at 


       Bombay   dismissing   the   Writ   Petition   No.   1687   of   2008, 


       wherein   the   appellants   had   challenged   the   validity   and 


       propriety of a Circular issued by the Director General of Civil 


       Aviation,   (hereinafter   called   as   `DGCA'),   respondent   No.1 


       dated 29.5.2008, to the effect that Civil Aviation Requirements 


      (hereinafter   called   as   the   `CAR')   dated   27.7.2007   had   been 


      kept in abeyance.  



3.    Facts   and   circumstances   giving   rise   to   this   case   are   that   the 


      appellants   are   the   Joint   Action   Committees   of   the   Airlines 


      Pilots   Association   representing   several   airlines   operating   in 


      India.   The dispute relates to the Flight Time (FT) and Flight 


      Duty   Time   Limitation   (FDTL),   as   there   is   some   variance 


      between   the   Aeronautical   Information   Circular   (hereinafter 


      called   as   `AIC')   No.28/92   and   the   CAR   2007.   Vide   AIC 


      28/92,   FT   and   FDTL   had   been   defined   and   fixed   depending 


      upon the distance of destination and number of landings. The 


      rest   period   for   the   pilots   stood   substantially   changed   by   the 


      CAR 2007 to the greater benefit of the pilots. However, a large 


      number of representations had been made by the airlines to the 


      DGCA   and   the   Central   Government,   respondents     herein,   to 


      the effect that it was practically not possible for them to ensure 


      compliance   of     CAR   2007     and   thus,   the   same   was   kept   in 


      abeyance.   By   a   subsequent   order   dated   2.6.2008,   the   AIC 


      28/92 was revived. 



                                                                                   2


4.       Appellants challenged the Circular  dated 29.5.2008 before the 


         High Court on the grounds, inter-alia,  that even if  CAR 2007 


         is   kept   in   abeyance,   the   AIC   28/92,   which   stood   obliterated, 


         could   not   be   revived;   the   CAR   2007   had   been   kept   in 


         abeyance by the order of the Authority, which did not have the 


         competence   to   interfere   in   the   functioning   of   the   DGCA, 


         respondent No. 1.  The statutory authority i.e. DGCA alone is 


         competent   to   pass   the   appropriate   order   in   the   matter.   The 


         Circular  dated  29.5.2008 has  seriously   jeopardised  the  safety 


         of passengers and the same was passed in flagrant violation of 


         the principles of natural justice.  However, the High Court did 


         not accept the submissions of the appellants, rather rejected the 


         same in an elaborate judgment. Hence, this appeal. 



5.           Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned senior counsel appearing for the 


appellants   has   agitated   all   the   issues   raised   before   the   High   Court. 



Once   AIC   28/92   stood   obliterated,   the   question   of   its 


revival/application/enforcement on putting the CAR 2007 in abeyance 


could not arise.  More so, the orders by the DGCA make it abundantly 


clear   that   the   same   had   been   passed   on   instructions   from   the 


competent   authority.   The   order   stood   vitiated   as   the   same   had   not 






                                                                                    3



been   passed   by   the   DGCA   on   its   own.     Law   does   not   permit   the 


keeping of the subordinate legislation in abeyance without following 


the   procedure,   prescribed   for   its   enactment.   The   Circular   dated 


29.5.2008 had been issued in violation of the guidelines stipulated for 


issuance   of   the   CAR.   The   judgment   and   order   impugned   herein   is 


liable to be set aside and the appeal deserves to be allowed. 



6.       On the contrary, Shri Parag P. Tripathi, learned ASG, Shri C.U. 


Singh and Shri L. Nageshwar Rao, learned senior counsel appearing 


for the respondents, have submitted that the writ petition filed by the 


appellants before the High Court was not maintainable as none of the 


necessary   parties   had   been   impleaded   therein.   However,   the 


respondents, i.e. the airlines got themselves impleaded in the petition. 



The AIC and CAR fall within the category of executive instructions 


which   simply   provide   the   guidelines   for   persons   working   in   the 


department.   The   said   administrative   instructions   do   not   have   any 


statutory force and thus can be kept in abeyance, altered or replaced 


by another executive instructions. Some of the appellants themselves 


challenged the CAR dated 27.7.2007 by filing Writ Petition No.2176 


of   2007   on   the   grounds   that   the   said   CAR   revealed   shocking 


deviations   and   selective   exclusions   from   international   safety 






                                                                                 4



requirements in respect of FDT and FTL. It has further been submitted 


therein   that   the   amendment   to   FDT   and   FTL   in   the   said   CAR   was 


neither  in conformity  with the  existing  safety  rules,  nor  with  settled 


principles   and   procedures   adopted   by   the   similar   international 


regulatory authorities. However, the said writ petition stood dismissed 


as     withdrawn   vide   order   dated   31.1.2008.     Once   the   CAR   dated 


27.7.2007   has   been   put   under   suspension,   the   same   is   also   under 


challenge by the appellants which also include some of the  petitioners 


in   Writ   Petition   No.   2176   of   2007.   Their   conduct   is   tantamount   to 


approbate and reprobate which is not permissible in law. The DGCA 


had communicated vide letter dated 29.5.2008 its decision to keep the 


CAR 2007 in abeyance on the basis of advice/decision taken by the 


competent   authority,   i.e.   the   Central   Government.   The   Hon'ble 


Minister was the competent authority under the Business Rules 1961. 



The  DGCA  himself  had also  participated   in the  process.     The  order 


dated 2.6.2008, providing that AIC 28/1992 would be effective once 


again,   was   not   challenged   by   the   appellants   for   the   reasons   best 


known to them.  An order which is not under challenge, could not be 


quashed.     Thus, no fault can be found with the impugned judgment 


and order. The appeal lacks merit and is liable to be dismissed. 



                                                                                   5


7.             We   have   considered   the   rival   submissions   made   by   learned 


counsel for the parties and perused the record. 



Relevant Statutory Provisions:



8.      It may be necessary to make reference to relevant provisions of 


the 
Aircraft Act, 1934
 (hereinafter referred to as `Act 1934').  
Section 


4A
   of   the   Act   1934   provides   for   safety   oversight   functions   that   the 


DGCA   shall   perform   the   safety   oversight   functions   in   respect   of 


matters specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.   
Section 5
 


empowers the Central Government to make rules.   
Sections 5(2)
 and 



5-A
 of the Act 1934 read as under:



         (2)     Without   prejudice   to   the   generality   of   the  

                 foregoing power, such rules may provide for-


         ...................................



         (m)     the measures   to be  taken  and the  equipment to  

                 be carried for the purpose of ensuring the safety  

                 of life.



           5A. Power to issue directions.-(1)             The   Director-



         General of Civil Aviation or any other officer specially  

         empowered  in this  behalf  by the  Central  Government  

         may,   from   time   to   time,   by   order,   issue   directions,  

         consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules  

         made   thereunder,   with   respect   to   any   of   the   matters  

         specified in clauses (aa), (b), (c), (e), (f),(g), (ga), (gb),  

         (gc), (h), (i), (m) and (qq) of sub-section (2) of section  

         5,   to   any   person   or   persons   using   any   aerodrome   or  

         engaged in the aircraft operations, air traffic control,  

         maintenance   and   operation   of   aerodrome,  

         communication,   navigation,   surveillance   and   air  






                                                                                     6



       traffic   management   facilities   and   safeguarding   civil  

       aviation   against   acts   of   unlawful   interference,   in   any  

       case  where  the Director-General   of Civil  Aviation   or  

       such other officer is satisfied that in the interests of the  

       security of India or for securing the safety of aircraft  

       operations it is necessary so to do.  



       (2) Every direction issued under sub-section (1) shall  

       be   complied   with   by   the   person   or   persons   to   whom  

       such direction is issued. 



 
Section 14
 provides that rules shall be made after publication. 



9.         The provisions of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 (hereinafter referred 


to as `Rules 1937') read as under: 



              "3(22)- "Flight time"-





       (i)      in   respect   of   any   aeroplane,   means   the   total  

                time   from   the   moment   of   the   aeroplane   first  

                moves   for   the   purpose   of   taking   off   until   the  

                moment it finally comes to rest at the end of the  

                flight; and

       .............................


       .........................



       29C. Adoption of the Convention and Annexes.- The  

       Director-General   may   lay   down   standards   and  

       procedures not inconsistent with the 
Aircraft Act
 1934  

       (22 of 1934) and the rules made thereunder   to carry  

       out the Convention and any Annex thereto. 



       42A. Pilot not to fly for more than 125 hours during  

       any period of 30 consecutive days.



       133A.       Direction   by   Director-General-  (1)   The  

       Director-General   may,  through   Notices  to   Airmen  

       (NOTAMS),   Aeronautical   Information   Publication,  

       Aeronautical   Information   Circulars   (AICs),   Notice   to  






                                                                                   7



        Aircraft   Owners   and   Maintenance   Engineers   and  

        publication entitled Civil Aviation Requirements issue  

        special   directions  not   inconsistent   with   the   
Aircraft  

        Act, 1934
 (22 of 1934) or  these  rules, relating to the  

        operation, use, possession, maintenance or navigation  

        of   aircraft   flying   in   or   over   India   or   of   aircraft  

        registered in India.



        (2)      The   Civil   Aviation   Requirements  under   sub-



                 rule (1) shall be issued after placing the draft  

                 on   the   website   of   the   Directorate   General   of  

                 Civil   Aviation   for   a   period   of   thirty   days   for  

                 inviting   objections   and   suggestions   from   all  

                 persons likely to be affected thereby:



                Provided that the Director General may, in the  

        public interest and by order in writing, dispense with  

        the   requirement   of   inviting   such   objections   and  

        suggestions.




        (3)     Every direction  issued under sub-rule (1)  shall  

        be complied with by  the persons or persons to whom  

        such direction is issued."                   (Emphasis added)





10.    The case requires to be considered in the light of the aforesaid 


submissions, the factual foundation laid by the parties and the relevant 


statutory provisions.  



11.    Admittedly,   a   Writ   Petition   No.   2176   of   2007   was   filed   by 


some of the present appellants seeking the following reliefs: 



               "(a)    That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to hold  

       and   declare   that   the   impugned   amendment   dated  

       27.7.2007   of   Civil   Aviation   Requirements   with   the  

       subject "Flight Duty Time and Flight Time Limitations  


       -   Flight   Crew   Members"   is   illegal,   irrational   and  






                                                                                     8



        inconsistent   with   the   settled   principles   of   law   and  

        practice.





        (b)     That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to issue a writ  

        of  mandamus  or   a   writ   in   the   nature   of   mandamus  or  

        any   other   appropriate   writ,   order   or   direction   under  

        
Article   226
   of   the   Constitution   of   India,   directing   the  

        respondent   DGCA,   not   to   proceed   with   the   impugned  

        amendment   dated   27.7.2007   without   conducting   a  

        thorough   scientific   study   by   an   expert   committee  

        consisting   of   Aviation   Medical   Specialists   under   the  

        guidance   of   an   impartial   medical   authority   such   as  

        DGCA-Air,   IAF   who   has   no   commercial   or   vested  

        interests.





        (c)     That   pending   the   hearing   and   final   disposal   of  

        this petition, this Hon'ble Court be pleased to direct the  

        respondent   to   maintain   status   quo  in   respect  of   Flight  

        Duty   Time   Limitations   (FDTL)   and   Flight   Time  

        Limitations (FTL) as on June 2007." 





12.     The   same   was   withdrawn   vide   order   dated   31.1.2008   and   the 


order runs as under: 



                        "The   learned   counsel   for   the   petitioners  

        submits that the grievance has already been redressed  

        and   he   does   not   want   to   pursue   the   petition.   Petition  

        dismissed as not pressed."





       The   appellants/writ   petitioners   therein   had   also   submitted   that 


AIC   28/92   was   a   most   scientific   and   properly   formulated   direction 


and   CAR   2007   was   based   on   a   draft   which   revealed   shocking 


deviations and selective exclusions from safety regulations in respect 


of FDT and FTL, adopted/accepted internationally.   



                                                                                     9


13.     
In 
R.N. Gosain v. Yashpal Dhir
, AIR 1993 SC 352, this Court 


observed as under:-




                 "Law   does   not   permit   a   person   to   both  

         approbate and reprobate. This principle is based on  

         the   doctrine   of   election   which   postulates   that   no  

         party can accept and reject the same instrument and  

         that   "a   person   cannot   say   at   one   time   that   a  

         transaction   is   valid   and   thereby   obtain   some  

         advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the  

         footing that it is valid, and then turn round and say it  

         is   void   for   the   purpose   of   securing   some   other  

         advantage."





14.     The   doctrine   of   election   is   based   on   the   rule   of   estoppel-   the 


principle   that   one   cannot   approbate   and   reprobate   inheres   in   it.   The 


doctrine of estoppel by election is one of the species of estoppels in 


pais (or equitable estoppel), which is a rule in equity. By that law, a 


person may be precluded by his actions or conduct or silence when it 


is his duty to speak, from asserting a right which he otherwise would 


have had. Taking inconsistent pleas by a party makes its conduct far 


from satisfactory.  Further, the parties should not blow hot and cold by 


taking   inconsistent   stands   and   prolong   proceedings   unnecessarily. 



(Vide:    Babu   Ram   @   Durga   Prasad   v.     Indra   Pal   Singh   (D)   by 


L.Rs.,   (1998)   6   SCC   358;  P.R.   Deshpandey   v.   Maruti   Balaram 


Haibatti,   (1998)   6   SCC   507;   and  Mumbai   International   Airport 





                                                                                        1



Private Limited v. Golden Chariot Airport & Anr., (2010) 10 SCC 



422).  



15.     In   view   of   the   above,   it   is   clearly   evident   that   some   of   the 


present appellants, had challenged the CAR 2007, wherein it had been 


submitted that AIC 28/92 was based on better scientific studies. The 


same  remained in operation  for more  than 17 years and  no one had 


ever   raised   any   grievance   in   respect   of   its   contents   or   application. 



However, it appears that during the pendency of the said writ petition, 


grievance   of   those   petitioners   stood   redressed   and,   thus,   they 


withdrew the writ petition. They did not even ask the court to reserve 


their   right   to   file   a   fresh   petition   challenging   the   same,   in   case   the 


need arose, as required in the principle enshrined in 
Order XXIII of 


the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908. Such a conduct of those appellants 


in blowing hot and cold in the same breath is not worth approval. 



16.     The appellants have raised the issue as to whether order dated 


29.5.2008,   keeping   the   CAR   2007   in   abeyance   could   be   passed 


without following the procedure prescribed in CAR dated 13.10.2006. 



        CAR dated 13.10.2006 provides for a detailed procedure for the 


promulgation of CAR. Clause 3.3 provides that whenever a change is 






                                                                                          1



effected to a CAR, it shall be termed as a revision and effective date 


of the revision of CAR shall be indicated therein.  According to clause 


4 thereof,  if a new CAR or a revision to the existing CAR is proposed 


to be issued, the draft of the proposed CAR/revision shall be posted 


on   DGCA's   website   or   circulated   to   all   the   persons   likely   to   be 


effected   thereby   inviting   their   objections/suggestions.   Objections   so 


received   shall   be   analysed,   considered   and   incorporated   in   case   the 


same are found to be acceptable, before the promulgation of CAR.



17.    
In  
State   of   A.P.   &  Ors.   v.  Civil   Supplies   Services   Assn.   & 


Ors.
, (2000) 9 SCC 299, the government had issued a notification that 


provided, inter-alia, that certain rules which  had earlier been framed 


by   the   government   would   be   kept   in   abeyance.   The   Administrative 


Tribunal   quashed   the   same   directing   the   government   to   frame   the 


rules in a particular manner and to give partial effect to the rules kept 


in abeyance. However, on appeal, this Court set aside the order of the 


Tribunal   and   held   that   the   Tribunal   could   neither   have   given 


directions to the Government to frame rules in any particular manner, 


nor to give partial effect to the rules kept in abeyance, as the order had 


exclusively been legislative in character.




                                                                                 1


         Thus, in exceptional circumstances, it may be permissible for 


 the   statutory   authority   to   put   subordinate   legislation   in   abeyance. 



 However,   such   an   order   being   legislative   in   character,   is   not 


 warranted to be interfered by the Court/Tribunal. 



18.      The   CAR   2007   is   neither   a   statute   nor   a   subordinate 


         legislation. Provisions contained in 
Sections 4A
, 
5
 & 
5A
 of the 


         Act 1934 and Rules 42A & 133A of the Rules 1937, make it 


         evident that the same are merely executive instructions which 


         can   be   termed   as   "special   directions".     The   executive 


         instruction   can   supplement   a   statute   or   cover   areas   to   which 


         the  statute  does  not  extend,  but  it  cannot  run  contrary  to  the 


         statutory provisions or whittle down their effect. (Vide:  State 


         of M.P. & Anr. v. M/s. G.S. Dall & Flour Mills (1992) supp. 



         1 SCC 150).



19.         
In  
Khet   Singh   v.   Union   of   India
,   AIR   2002   SC   1450,   this 


Court   considered   the   scope   and   binding   force   of   the   Executive 


instructions  issued  by  the  Narcotic  Bureau,   New  Delhi  and  came  to 


the   conclusion   that   such   instructions   are   binding   and   have   to   be 


followed   by   the   investigating   officer,   coming   within   the   purview   of 



Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
, even though 






                                                                                    1



such instructions do not have the force of law. They are intended to 


guide the officers and to see that a fair procedure is adopted by them 


during the investigation of the crime.




20.           A Constitution Bench of this Court in  Sant Ram Sharma v. 



State of Rajasthan & Ors., AIR 1967 SC 1910 held as under:



                "It   is   true   that   Government   cannot   amend   or  
              supersede   statutory   rules   by   administrative  
              instructions,  but   if   the   rules   are   silent   on   any  
              particular point, Government can fill up the gaps  
              and   supplement   the   rules   and   issue  instructions  
              not   inconsistent   with   the   rules   already   framed."  

              (Emphasis added) 

 


                      Thus, an executive order is to be issued keeping in view the 


rules and executive business, though the executive order may not have 


a force of law but it is issued to provide guidelines to all concerned, 


who are bound by it.



21.    
In 
Union of India & Anr. v. Amrik Singh & Ors.
, AIR 1994 


SC   2316,   this   Court   examined   the   scope   of   executive   instructions 


issued   by   the   Comptroller   and   Auditor   General   for   making   the 


appointments   under   the   provisions   of   Indian   Audit   and   Accounts 


Department   (Administrative   Officers,   Accounts   Officers   and   Audit 


Officers)   Recruitment   Rules,   1964,   and   came   to   the   conclusion   that 


the   CAG   of   India   had   necessary   competence   to   issue   departmental 





                                                                                   1



instructions on matters of conditions of service of persons serving in 


Department,   being   the   Head   of   the   Department,   in   spite   of   the 


statutory   rules   existing   in   this   regard.     The   Court   came   to   the 


conclusion that an enabling provision is there and in view thereof, the 


CAG had exercised his powers and issued the instructions which are 


not inconsistent with the statutory rules, the same are binding for the 


reason that the provision in executive instructions has been made with 


the required competence by the CAG.




22.     Thus,   it   is   evident   from   the   above   that   executive   instructions 


which are issued for guidance and to implement the scheme of the Act 


and   do   not   have   the   force   of   law,   can   be   issued   by   the   competent 


authority   and  altered,   replaced   and  substituted   at  any   time.   The   law 


merely   prohibits   the   issuance   of   a   direction,   which   is   not   in 


consonance with the Act or the statutory rules applicable therein.



23.           This Court in  
State of U.P. & Ors. v. Hirendra Pal Singh
 


etc., JT (2010) 13 SC 610,   considered a large number of judgments 


particularly   in  
Firm   A.T.B.   Mehtab   Majid   &   Co.   v.   State   of 


Madras &  Anr.
, AIR 1963 SC 928; 
B.N. Tewari v. Union of India 


& Ors.
, AIR 1965 SC 1430; 
Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) 


Private Ltd. & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
, AIR 1986 SC 515;




                                                                                      1


West U.P. Sugar Mills Association & Ors. v. State of U.P. & Ors.
, 


AIR 2002 SC 948; 
Zile Singh v. State of Haryana & Ors.
, (2004) 8 


SCC   1;   and  
State   of   Kerala   &   Anr.   v.   Peoples   Union
   for   Civil 


Liberties, Kerala State Unit & Ors., (2009) 8 SCC 46, and came to 


the conclusion that once the old rule has been substituted by the new 


rule,   it   stands   obliterated,   thus   ceases   to   exist   and   under   no 


circumstance,   can   it   be   revived   in   case   the   new   rule   is   held   to   be 


invalid   and   struck   down   by   the   Court,   though   position   would   be 


different in case a statutory amendment by the Legislature, is held to 


be   bad   for   want   of   legislative   competence.   In   that   situation,   the 


repealed statutory provisions would revive automatically.




24.It is not a case of automatic revival of AIC 28/92, but there is a 


    specific order  by the competent authority in exercise of statutory 


    powers   whereby   the   AIC   28/92   has   been   revived.     Since   the 


    instructions which have been issued under the letter dated 2.6.2008 


    are   merely   in   the   form   of   interim   measures,   the   question   of   the 


    applicability of the principles of natural justice does not arise.  The 


    suspension   of   CAR   2007   had   created   a   vacuum,     and   it   was, 


    therefore, necessary for the DGCA to take an appropriate decision 


    during   the   finalisation   of   the   CAR,   pursuant   to   the   report   to   be 






                                                                                        1



   submitted   by   a   Committee   constituted   by   the   Government.     The 


   appellants did not challenge the subsequent order dated 2.6.2008, 


   by   virtue   of   which   AIC   28/92   dated   10.12.1992   came   into   force 


   which had also been nothing but special directions and remained in 


   force from 1992 to 2007.  



25.In the High Court it was sought to be contended on behalf of the 


   appellants that as the order dated 2.6.2008 was in continuation of 


   the   Circular   dated   29.5.2008,   it   was   not   necessary   for   the 


   appellants to challenge the said order separately.   The High Court 


   held: 



             "We are afraid the contention is not well-founded.  

             While the Circular dated 29.5.2008 relates to the  

             subject   of   suspension   of   CAR   of   2007,   the   letter  

             dated   2.6.2008   refers   to   instructions   to   the   effect  

             that   AIC   28/92   would   be   effective   till   CAR   is  

             approved by following the procedure 
laid down in
  

             CAR   of   13.10.2006.   The   subject   matter   of   two  

             documents   being   different,   merely   because   the  

             second   document   is   in   continuation   of   the   first  

             document, it cannot be said that the challenge to  

             the   first   document   would   ipso   facto   include  

             challenge to the second document.  





                     The letter dated 2.6.2008 is not the effect of  

             the   Circular   dated   29.5.2008,   but   the   same     has  

             been issued in exercise of powers under Rule 133A  

             of the Rules 1937 to meet the circumstances which  

             have   resulted   on   account   of   CAR   2007,   being  

             suspended.   The   cause   for   issuance   of   the   letter  

             dated   2.6.2008   is   not   directly   flowing   from   the  






                                                                                    1



          Circular dated 29.5.2008,  but it was issued for the  

          consequences   which   followed   the   issuance   of   the  

          Circular   dated   29.5.2008.   Being   so,   in   case   the  

          appellants wanted to challenge the communication  

          dated 2.6.2008, they ought to have challenged the  

          same by raising specific ground in that regard by  

          laying   proper   factual   foundation   in   support   of  

          such ground and only then, they could have invited  

          the order in that regard from the court."



              In absence of the challenge to the same, it is immaterial 


to determine as to whether the same had been issued by the competent 


authority or not, as it is not the case of statutory rules i.e. subordinate 


legislation.  The question of following any procedure for replacement 


is not warranted.   



26. The contention was raised before the High Court that the Circular 



   dated   29.5.2008   has   been   issued   by   the   authority   having   no 


   competence, thus cannot be enforced.               It   is   a   settled   legal 


   proposition   that   the   authority   which   has   been   conferred   with   the 


   competence   under   the   statute   alone   can   pass   the   order.   No   other 


   person,   even   a   superior   authority,   can   interfere   with   the 


   functioning of the Statutory Authority. In a democratic set up like 


   ours,   persons   occupying   key   positions   are   not   supposed   to 


   mortgage  their  discretion,   volition  and  decision  making authority 


   and   be   prepared   to   give   way   to   carry   out   commands   having   no 






                                                                                  1



       sanctity   in   law.   Thus,   if   any   decision   is   taken   by   a   statutory 


       authority   at   the   behest   or   on   suggestion   of   a   person   who   has   no 


       statutory role to play, the same would be patently illegal.   (Vide: 



 
The   Purtabpur   Co.,   Ltd.   v.   Cane   Commissioner   of   Bihar   & 


       Ors.,   AIR   1970   SC   1896;  
Chandrika   Jha   v.   State   of   Bihar   & 


       Ors.
,   AIR   1984   SC   322;  
Tarlochan   Dev   Sharma   v.   State   of 


       Punjab   &  Ors.
,   AIR   2001   SC   2524;   and  
Manohar   Lal   (D)   by 


       L.Rs. v. Ugrasen (D) by L.Rs. & Ors.
, AIR 2010 SC 2210).


27.        Similar   view   has   been   re-iterated   by   this   Court   in 



Commissioner   of   Police,   Bombay   v.   Gordhandas   Bhanji
,   AIR 


1952   SC   16;  
Bahadursinh   Lakhubhai   Gohil   v.   Jagdishbhai   M. 


Kamalia & Ors.
, AIR 2004 SC 1159;  and Pancham Chand & Ors.




v. State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors., AIR 2008 SC 1888, observing 


that an authority vested with the power to act under the statute alone 


should   exercise   its   discretion   following   the   procedure   prescribed 


therein and interference on the part of any authority upon whom the 


statute does not confer any jurisdiction, is wholly unwarranted in law. 



It violates the Constitutional scheme.  



28.        In   view   of   the   above,   the   legal   position   emerges   that   the 


authority   who   has   been   vested   with   the   power   to   exercise   its 






                                                                                          1



discretion   alone   can   pass   the   order.   Even   senior   official   cannot 


provide for any guideline or direction to the authority under the statute 


to act in a particular manner. 



       It   cannot   be   said   that   the   Circular   dated   29.5.2008   was   either 


issued illegally  or without  any authority.    Admittedly,  the DGCA is 


competent to issue special directions and the same had been issued by 


him, though may be with the consultation of some other authorities. 



However,   it   cannot   be   denied   that   the   DGCA   was     involved   in   the 


process. The authority which had been in consultation with the DGCA 


had been provided for under the business rules and it cannot be held 


by any stretch of imagination that the Ministry of Civil Aviation is not 


an authority concerned with the safety measures involved herein. The 


authorities are competent to issue the said regulations. Exercise of the 


power   is   always   referable   to   the   source   of   power   and   must   be 


considered in conjunction with it. In view of the fact that the source of 


power exists, there is no occasion for the Court to link the exercise of 


power to another source which may invalidate the exercise of power.



29.     The   High   Court   has   observed   that   in   the   instant   case,   the 


reviving of AIC 28/92 is in question, even the keeping in abeyance of 


the CAR, whether by the DGCA or other  competent authority, is in 






                                                                                     2



issue.  However, it is merely an interregnum arrangement till the new 


CAR comes into picture.   After keeping the CAR 2007 in abeyance, 


an Expert  Committee  was constituted  which held a large  number  of 


meetings   with   various   stakeholders.   The   final   report   has   been 


submitted by the Expert Committee to the Government in September 


2010   for   consideration.     The   Government   has   accepted   FDTL 


Committee   report   and   advised   the   DGCA   to   issue   draft   CAR   for 


consultation   and   the   same   has   been   put   on   the   DGCA   website 


inviting   comments   or   objections   within   a   period   of   30   days.   It   is   a 


question   of   challenging   the   public   policy   and   it   is   well   settled   that 


public  authorities   must  be  given  a   very  long  rope,  full  freedom  and 


full liberty in framing policies, though the discretion of the authorities 


cannot   be   absolute   and   unqualified,   unfettered   or   uncanalised.     The 


same can be the subject matter of judicial scrutiny  only in exceptional 


circumstances where it can be shown to be arbitrary, unreasonable or 


violative of the statutory provisions. More so, the courts are not well 


equipped   to   deal   with   technical   matters,   particularly,   where   the 


decisions are based on purely hyper-technical issues.   The court may 


not be able to consider competing claims and conflicting interests and 


conclude on which way the balance tilts. 



                                                                                       2


                More   so,   the   whole   exercise   has   been   done   to   bring   a 


new   CAR   into   existence   for   which   the   process   has   already   been 


initiated   and   a   draft   CAR   was   put   on   the   DGCA   website   giving 


opportunity   to   all     concerned   to   submit   their   objections/suggestions 


within   a   period   of   30   days   and   a   new   CAR   is   likely   to   come   into 


existence                         very                        soon.                          



30.        The  High Court held that DGCA is directly under the control 


of Civil Aviation Ministry and considering the rules of business, the 


Government   being   the    appropriate   authority   to  formulate   necessary 


policy in relation to the subject matter in issue, and the Government in 


its   wisdom   having   decided   after   taking   into   consideration   all   the 


representations   made   from   various   sections,   has   appointed   a 


Committee   to   formulate   CAR   in   relation   to   the   matters   enumerated 


under order dated 29.5.2008, and on that count, the DGCA in exercise 


of its power under Rule 133A r/w Rule 29C of the Rules 1937 issued 


the Circular dated 29.5.2008, and therefore, no fault can be found with 


the same.  



         Being   so,   we   are   in   agreement   with   the   finding   recorded   by 


 the   High   Court   that   even   assuming   that   there   is   a   challenge   to   the 






                                                                                       2



     communication   dated   2.6.2008   in   the   petition,   the   same   is   to   be 


     considered   as   devoid   of   substance   as   undisputedly,   the   DGCA   has 


     ample power to issue such instructions or directions in exercise of its 


     power under the Rule 133A r/w Rule 29C of the Rules 1937. Since, 


     the appellants have not been able to point out any provision even for 


     issuance of instructions for such interregnum period, the provisions 


     of CAR of 13.10.2006 would be attracted in the matter.    



31.        In view of the above, we do not find any force in the appeal, it 


is accordingly dismissed.   No order as to costs.   Before parting with 


the case, we would like to point out that in the facts and circumstances 


of the case, as the process to bring new CAR in existence is going on, 


the same should be concluded expeditiously in accordance with law. 



                                                   ..................................J.

                                                   (P. SATHASIVAM)




                                                   ...................................J.

                                                   (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)

     New Delhi, 

     May  3, 2011.



                                                                                    2


2